
Acknowledgements
Many thanks go to the numerous experts who provided valuable input and perspective during develop-
ment and writing of this white paper. Catalina Garzon of the Pacific Institute, Jennifer Yeamans of the
Metropolitan Transportation Commission and Julie Ekstrom of UC Berkeley patiently provided support
with development and dissemination of the survey and review edits on the white paper. Special thanks go
to Lindy Lowe and Sara Polgar for editing several drafts of the white paper. Finally, many Adapting to Ris-
ing Tides working group members helped to disseminate and provided helpful input along the way.
Cover photos credit: ABAG
San Francisco Bay
Conservation and Development Commission
Table of Contents
Addressing Social Vulnerability and Equity in Climate Change Adaptation Planning
1. Introduction 1
1.1 Key Concepts–Vulnerability Assessments and Equity 3
1.2 Influences on Vulnerability 4
1.3 Equity and the ART Project 5
2. Social Vulnerability to Hazards 9
2.1 Learning from Historic Exposure to Hazards 9
2.2 Social Vulnerability Analysis 12
2.3 ART Integrated Vulnerability Assessment Framework 13
2.4 Social Vulnerability in the ART Subregion 15
2.5 Adapting to Rising Tides – Equity and Sea-Level Rise Survey 20
2.5.1 Survey Purpose and Methods 20
2.5.2 Results 21
2.5.3 Resilience and Equity 25
2.5.4 Discussion 26
3. Tools for Understanding Equity in Planning for Climate Change 27
3.1 Integrating Social Vulnerability into Adaptation Planning--Fresno and
San Luis Obispo Counties 27
3.2 Measuring Equity: Plan Bay Area’s Equity Analysis Framework 29
3.3 Integrating Equity into Sea-Level Rise and Flood Protection Projects 33
3.4 Decision-Support Tools 34
4. Conclusion 37
References 40
1
1. Introduction
As planning for sea level rise and extreme storm events moves forward, so too should state objectives
for achieving environmental justice and equity for all Californians. The purpose of this white paper is
to highlight the links between equity and planning for sea level rise and storm events and is designed to
inform the Adapting to Rising Tides project (ART) being led by the San Francisco Bay Conservation and
Development Commission.
Social equity is “fair access to livelihood, education and resources; full participation in the political and
cultural life of the community; and self determination in meeting fundamental needs” (Ecotrust, 2011).
Communities and populations that experience social inequalities are likely to be more vulnerable or sus-
ceptible to immediate and lasting harm from hazards such as coastal flooding. An analysis of social equity
involves understanding the effects of a change (e.g. a project or event) on communities and the services
that they rely on and value, with specific attention to effects that are borne disproportionately due to
existing inequalities. As a result of continually strengthened policies and agency mandates since the 1990’s
as well as the hard work of community groups to advocate for equity, planners and policy-makers have
increasingly worked to integrate consideration of equity issues into relevant projects, policies and pro-
grams.
Social equity has diverse roots, including the environmental justice movement, which came about in
response to the growing recognition that minority and low-income communities experience greater
exposure to environmental hazards. Requirements to address environmental justice began with President
Clinton’s Executive Order 12898 of 1994, which requires federal government agencies to:
Make achieving environmental justice part of its mission by identifying…disproportionately
high and adverse human health or environmental affects of its programs, policies and
activities on minorities and low-income populations (Presidential Executive Order 12898).
Section 1 introduces key concepts
related to climate change adaptation
and provides background informa-
tion on the ART project. Section
2 introduces the concept of social
vulnerability and the existing body
of literature on equity, resiliency
and climate change adaptation, and
explores historic examples of flood
events, such as Hurricane Katrina. In
addition, it lays out the assessment
framework used in the ART project
and key findings from a social vul-
nerability analysis completed for the
study area. Section 3 includes three
case studies of recent or ongoing
planning processes that have sought
to integrate equity and community
issues. Finally, section 4 summa-
rizes key conclusions and recom-
mendations from demographic and
survey analysis to inform equity
considerations in the Adapting to
Rising Tides project and for the
larger community of climate change
adaptation and equity planners,
organizers, and advocates in the San
Francisco Bay Area.
Environmental Justice in California State Planning
The Governor’s Office of Planning and Research (OPR) is
designated as California’s coordinating agency for envi-
ronmental justice, a role that includes providing guidance
to local governments and serving as a clearinghouse on
environmental justice issues. OPR has developed programs,
policies and standards for environmental justice in planning.
The following are goals for environmental justice based
on findings put forth by OPR and adopted by the Cal/EPA
Interagency Working Group.
Statewide Environmental Justice Goals:
•
State government that is inclusive and responsive to
people of all back grounds with regard to environmen-
tal policies, laws and regulations.
•
People of all backgrounds are ensured a healthy envi-
ronment.
•
Environmental justice leadership across all state
agencies
Source: OPR, 2003
2
The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) set up the Office of Environmental Justice in 1992 to ad-
dress negative environmental consequences from industrial, municipal or commercial activities on com-
munities. The state of California Government Code defines environmental justice in statute as:
The fair treatment of people of all races, cultures and incomes with respect to
the development, adoption, implementation, and enforcement of environmental
laws, regulations and policies (Government Code Section 65040.12).
3
1.1 Key Concepts–Vulnerability Assessments and Equity
Vulnerability is defined by three primary factors: exposure, sensitivity and adaptive capacity (ICLEI,
2009). An impact can be a distinct hazard event (e.g., a storm) or a chronic or cumulative stress (e.g.,
rising groundwater). Exposure describes whether and to what degree a community will experience
a stress or hazard due to a climate change impact. In the ART project, which is focused on the climate
impacts of sea level rise and storm events, exposure is defined as whether a geographical area will be
exposed to either sea level rise or storm events, an approximation of the magnitude of the exposure and
the general timeframe that the exposure is likely to occur.
Sensitivity is the degree to which a community is affected by the climatic stressor. For example, in
the analysis of vulnerability of park and recreation areas within the ART project area, the sensitivity of a
trail that is exposed to sea level rise and storm events will be greater for an unpaved trail that is already
experiencing erosion and drainage problems than for a paved, well-drained trail. These two trails may
be exposed to the same storm event but the unpaved trail will be much more sensitive to and more
damaged by that exposure. Generally, effects can be direct (damage to the community and its assets) or
indirect (stressors can make populations more susceptible to extreme conditions associated with climate
change) (Moser and Ekstrom, 2010).
The final component of vulnerability is adaptive capacity. Adaptive capacity describes the ability of
a system to adjust to potential climate changes (CARE, 2009). It can be assessed across scales, from the
level of the individual to cities or nations. Factors influencing adaptive capacity include levels of economic
resources, competency and reliability of institutions, adequacy of infrastructure, technological capability,
education and knowledge, stakeholder engagement, and equity in access and distribution of resources
(Moser and Ekstrom, 2010). Those individuals, communities, cities and nations with a greater degree of
adaptive capacity will suffer less harm from exposure to the climate impact and recover more quickly
from the impact than those with a lower degree of adaptive capacity.
Another way to think about adaptive capacity is resilience. Community resilience is the ability to with-
stand and recover from difficult times while meeting basic needs for community members (Bay Localize,
2009). It has been described as the ability to reorganize in response to change while still being able to
preserve the structure and function of a community (Eakin and Luers, 2006). As Carl Folke, et al., explain,
Vulnerability is the flip side of resilience: when a social or ecological system loses resilience
it becomes vulnerable to change that previously could be absorbed. In a resilient system,
change has the potential to create opportunity for development, novelty and innovation.
In a vulnerable system, even small changes may be devastating. (Folke, et al., 2002).
For communities across the Bay Area, vulnerability and resilience play out in every day examples. Imagine
a bus line is eliminated along a route that serves a diverse population of residents. For some, the loss of
a bus line could mean the difference between being able to get to work, medical appointments, or other
important daily tasks. For car owners, bicyclists, or families who can afford to purchase these items, a
disruption of service can prove a minor inconvenience.
Strong community relationships can also play a role in vulnerability and resilience. Neighbors with strong
ties and social relationships will more inclined to help each other out in times of crisis or change. The
elimination of a bus route in a community with strong social relationships might not be as significant,
as those existing relationships could lead to ride-sharing and car-sharing. In these examples, individual,
household and neighborhood factors play a role in community vulnerability and resilience. Such effects
can also play out at the city or county scale. For example, in cities that serve residents with a network of
public transit that has some redundancies in the system, the loss of the same bus line would be less likely
to cut off a low-income community or household from important services and employment. Folks could
simply take another bus or train. Similarly, community centers, parks, and places of worship can improve
resilience by bringing neighbors closer together and providing emergency facilities and resources during
a disaster.
1.2 Influences on Vulnerability
As described above, understanding vulnerability to hazards requires in-depth knowledge of the linkages
between social, environment, economic and governance factors and how these are brought to bear on a
community (Cutter, 1996). In the context of climate change, it can be understood as:
The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects
of climate change, including climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function
of [the] character, magnitude, and rate of climate variation to which a system is exposed,
its sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity (IPCC, 2001).
4
ART Existing Conditions and Stressors Report
In the ART project Existing Conditions and Stressors Report, equity is consid-
ered along with economy, environment and governance across all asset catego-
ries. The Existing Conditions and Stressors Report was published in January
2012. The report was intended to provide information on the current conditions
within the project area, and serves as the foundation for the vulnerability and
risk assessment. The current condition of, and existing stressors on an asset
have implications for an asset’s vulnerability and risk, and can contribute to its
resilience (or lack thereof) to projected climate impacts.
The themes of economy, equity, environment and governance provided the
overall framework for evaluating the asset categories in the report, in addition
to providing an overview of the physical location of assets, characteristics, and
existing stressors. Socio-economic trends for the study area are also highlighted,
including population trends and a discussion of vulnerable populations and exist-
ing inequalities.
Vulnerability is a dynamic state influenced by factors
such as existing inequalities, historic patterns of
marginalization, policy and management activities
and degree of community engagement (Eakin and
Luers, 2006).
It is important to recognize that vulnerability can
apply to the physical, the social and the economic
attributes of communities. Physical vulnerability de-
scribes the ways in which the built and natural envi-
ronment has the potential to be harmed and include
buildings, utilities, transportation networks, natural
areas and agricultural land. Social and economic
vulnerability describes the ways individuals, house-
holds and neighborhoods may be disproportionately
harmed by a hazard, and considers a wide range of
characteristics such as family relationships, gender,
race, income, and hazard exposure (Colten, et al.,
2008). Physical, social and economic vulnerability
greatly influence each other. For example, the loss of
the functionality of physical infrastructure, such as a
hospital, can have major social and economic impli-
cations such as loss of employment, loss of services
and loss of an emergency evacuation center. Similarly,
major economic losses within a region can reduce
opportunities to improve physical infrastructure and provide community services, thus impacting both
physical and social vulnerability. In fact, community health and safety relies on continual efforts to reduce
vulnerability in all of these areas and to understand the effects that physical, social and economic factors
can have on each other.
1.3 Equity and the ART Project
The ART project is conducting a vulnerability assessment for a number of assets–physical, social and
economic–within a subregion of the Bay Area and developing an adaptation strategy to respond to the
vulnerabilities identified within that area. It is a collaborative effort evaluating how a subregion in the Bay
Area can become more resilient to climate change, particularly to sea level rise and storm events. The
ART project is a pilot project that will ultimately provide guidance on how best to approach two broad
questions:
•
How will sea level rise and other climate change impacts affect the future of Bay Area
		 communities, ecosystems, infrastructure, and economy?
•
What strategies should we pursue, both locally and regionally, to address these challenges
		 and reduce and manage these risks?
5
Figure 1: ART Project Study Area
The only way to answer both of these questions is to incorporate equity considerations and focusing on
protecting and preserving quality of life for Bay Area residents during uncertain times. The primary goal
of the ART project is to increase the Bay Area’s preparedness and resilience to sea level rise and storm
events while protecting critical ecosystem and community services. The study area encompasses a por-
tion of the Alameda County shoreline from the City of Emeryville to the City of Union City, extending
inland approximately a half a mile beyond the area projected to be exposed to storm event flooding with
55 inches of sea level rise.
ART project staff is integrating equity into planning and analysis in three primary ways. First, project staff
is taking an integrated approach to evaluate the vulnerability and risk of shoreline communities, criti-
cal facilities and assets such as transportation networks, the airport and seaport, as well as parks and
recreation. This approach includes evaluating effects on communities and ecosystems through the lens of
four, overarching frames: society and equity, economy, environment, and governance. These four frames
comprise an approach to developing adaptation strategies that will address how shoreline communities
and the region as a whole can support a sustainable, resilient and prosperous Bay Area.
Second, staff developed and administered a
survey to project partners, which includes
local, regional, state and federal agencies.
The survey was also sent to advocacy
groups, local governments, community
leaders and non-profit organizations out-
side of the ART working group. The survey
asked local experts and community advo-
cates on climate change, social justice and
equity for their best professional judgment
on major equity issues related to sea level
rise. It identified:
•
Ways that a diverse range of practitio
ners define resilience in the context of
equity;
•
Specific equity concerns in analyzing and
adapting to sea level rise;
•
Barriers to integrating equity into adap
tation; and
•
Major success stories that can be built
upon for future sea-level rise planning
efforts.
Survey analysis will provide valuable insight
into current thinking on equity and resil-
ience planning in the San Francisco Bay
6
Using Metrics to Track Equity
ART project staff developed asset specific metrics in
collaboration with project partners. These metrics
will be used to inform sensitivity, adaptive capacity
and consequences of sea level rise and storm events.
Metrics were developed for four broad areas: eq-
uity/society, economy, environment and governance.
Equity specific metrics covered:
•
Public health
•
Proximity of assets/services to sensitive popula-
tions
•
Historic exposure
•
Sensitive populations served by assets/services
•
Emergency preparedness for sensitive popula-
tions
•
Critical facilities (hospitals, transportation, fire
stations, etc.)
•
Public access
Area. See section 2.5 for analysis of survey results. Third, this white paper will serve as a tool to highlight
the current state of integrating equity into climate change adaptation planning, the multiple methods and
approaches that can be used and key findings from the equity and community work done in the ART
project that will be incorporated to the development of adaptation strategies.
7
An ART project wroking group member at the Subregional Kickoff Meeting
8
2. Social Vulnerability to Hazards
2.1 Learning from Historic Exposure to Hazards
Equity can play out on the ground before, during and after a disaster or hazard event, leading to dispro-
portionate burdens in communities as well as longer rebuilding and recovery periods. Disasters can bring
to light the ways environmental injustice impairs community health and resilience. Manuel Pastor et al.
(2006) observed:
The social dynamics that underlie the disproportionate environmental hazards faced by
low-income communities and minorities also play out in the arena of disaster prevention,
mitigation, and recovery. In a sense, environmental justice is about slow motion
disasters—and disasters reveal environmental injustice in a fast-forward mode. Both
revolve around the axes of disparities of wealth and power.
Environmental justice issues can play a role in heightening the risks of individuals and entire communities
to hazards. Communities that have historically been impacted by environmental degradation often lack
the resources that would give them access to resources and redundancies to reduce harm during times
of crisis. This creates a situation in which, prior to a disaster, a community has high potential risks due to
factors such as less insurance, lower income and savings, greater unemployment and diminished access to
information. Once exposed to a hazard, the community’s resilience is further sapped, causing an intensifi-
cation of existing poverty and other risk factors. (Pastor, et al., 2006).
Hurricane Katrina illustrates the second part of Pastor’s point–a disaster that revealed environmental
injustice in days rather than years. Numerous factors, foremost among them emergency preparedness
that failed to address equity and the needs of the city’s varied populations, combined with the impacts
of an extreme storm event, resulted in a social and economic disaster. At the height of the storm, water
covered 80% of the city in some places at a depth of 15 feet, and it is estimated that there were 1,570
deaths and $40-$50 billion in monetary losses as a result (Kates, et al., 2006). Had the region defined the
9
likely vulnerabilities of its services, sectors and people; developed an emergency response plan to reduce
vulnerabilities during the event; and adopted a recovery plan to implement after the event and included
the community in creating the plan, the impacts of the event would likely have been significantly reduced.
Hurricane Katrina should not have come as a sur-
prise to the emergency response planners and others
in local, state and federal government. In the years
leading up to Katrina, experts provided repeated
warnings that a “big one” would some day hit New
Orleans. At the time, half of the city’s 437,186 resi-
dents lived below sea level as a result of growth that
was facilitated by decades of construction in low-ly-
ing areas behind an expanding levee system. The New
Orleans levee system was known to have vulner-
abilities, although the extent was unclear. At the same
time, wetlands that can act as buffers during storm
events were being depleted. These trends toward
suburbanization in low-lying areas and environmen-
tal degradation are not unique to New Orleans, and
they created significant physical, economic and social
vulnerability in the region prior to Hurricane Katrina
(Gotham and Campanella, 2011). As the hurricane
made landfall, the levees were inadequate to protect
the communities behind them, as overtopping and
levee failure caused waters to flow into low-lying ar-
eas. In addition to locating neighborhoods in low lying
areas and environmental degradation, New Orleans
lacked a strategy to ensure the safety of it’s commu-
nity members.
Although the event was extreme, it fell within existing projections. Planning for emergency and recovery
response did not consider the unique challenges that vulnerable communities would have both during
the disaster and in recovering from it. Addressing such considerations would have reduced the economic
and social cost of the disaster. The Louisiana State Emergency Plan had failed to address the needs of the
130,000 residents in the region who lived without vehicles, or otherwise had limited mobility (home-
bound, in hospitals or in-care facilities) (Kates, et al., 2006). While some 1.2 million evacuees found
shelter, others some stayed in place because they did not believe the storm was as bad as predicted, or
because they lacked automobiles, access to transportation or funds to evacuate. Other residents who
stayed behind did so to care for family members and/or pets, or institutionalized populations in hospitals
and nursing homes (Colten, et al., 2008). The emergency response plans at all levels of government failed
to address these likely outcomes and failed to identify strategies to address them.
Learning from past mistakes, the Louisiana Recovery Authority is moving ahead with coastal restora-
tion and improved levee protections to minimize risks from future disasters. In addition, the city of New
Orleans now has a City-Assisted Evacuation Plan, which makes provision for residents without cars or
10
Communities have been working to rebuild since
Harricane Katrina
Photo credit: David Currier
without enough transportation to accommodate their entire family (including pets), homeless residents
and residents with medical needs that prevent them from evacuating on their own (City of New Or-
leans, 2012). In addition, the Army Corps of Engineers has moved forward with studies to understand the
causes of levee failures during the storm and improve standards for future levees. The Federal Emer-
gency Management Agency has also come out with new standards for New Orleans residents seeking to
rebuild in flood prone areas that require ground floors be built at the Base Flood Elevation, 3 feet above
grade. Finally, the state has also sought to improve planning for its coastal zone with a blend of coastal
restoration and improvement of levee protections. However, while these planning efforts focus on sus-
tainable development, they also continue to promote economic development in low lying and vulnerable
areas (Colten, et al., 2008).
In addition to Hurricane Katrina, examples from the San Francisco Bay Area also demonstrate the need
to plan for sensitive populations. Sometimes, relatively minor aspects of emergency response can greatly
influence a community’s resilience. For example, in March, 2011 an earthquake hit Japan and triggered a
tsunami that spread across the Pacific Ocean and caused millions of dollars of damage on the California
coast (Lagos, et al., 2011). Coordinated response to warn residents occurred statewide. However, as
the tsunami approached, it became clear that large-scale evacuation for residents of low-lying areas was
not necessary. In San Mateo County, the Office of Emergency Services updated residents by sending out
telephone messages. Yet while the original message to evacuate had gone out in multiple languages, there
was no translation service available in the updated message. Thus, Spanish-speaking residents continued
to evacuate their homes. In one shelter in Half Moon Bay, 90 percent of the nearly 300 evacuees were
Spanish-speaking and there were no translation services available (Reis, 2011). Fortunately, this over-
sight in preparedness caused relatively little harm to the community, but it illustrates the importance of
understanding local populations and needs. Social factors can influence the severity of a coastal hazard on
a community in conjunction with other factors such as planning, development patterns, and community
engagement. As Colten, et al. (2008) point out:
The impacts of hazard events are made more severe by preconditions of social vulnerability
and other concurrent stresses or events. For example, the impacts of floods can be made
worse by floodplain development, low-income populations in inferior housing in vulnerable
locations, land subsidence, stream channel alteration associated with transportation or levee
building, and precipitation and tropical cyclone intensity from climate change.
Lessons learned from these examples inform climate adaptation planning in the San Francisco Bay Area.
While some vulnerable populations were identified prior to Hurricane Katrina, planning failed to provide
solutions for these residents, and thus many remained in harms way during the disaster. Social equity
factors, such as disparities in income, linguistic isolation, educational attainment and access to resources
can greatly influence the ways populations experience a hazard. Understanding equity and engaging com-
munities that will be most affected before, during and after a hazard event are steps toward building an
adequate response to climate change. By helping to facilitate responses that are rooted in the needs of
local communities and local challenges, climate change adaptation planning can become more effective.
11
2.2 Social Vulnerability Analysis
Social vulnerability is a key determinant of overall vulnerability within a population. It is defined as “the
interplay of social, economic and demographic characteristics that determine the resiliency of individu-
als and communities to climate change” (Cox, et. al, 2006). Social vulnerability analysis plays a critical
role in identifying sensitive populations and community resilience for diverse populations, and should
play a significant role in hazard and emergency preparedness and response, as well as in climate change
adaptation planning. It also considers historic exposure of existing populations if relevant. A broad range
of demographic, social and economic factors should be evaluated in a social vulnerability study. Factors
that affect social vulnerability occur at a variety of scales, from the individual to the community. Figure 2,
taken from the Australian report, “Quantifying Social Vulnerability: A methodology for identifying those at
risk to natural hazards,” depicts the various social and demographic factors and the kinds of questions to
consider in a social vulnerability study.
Figure 2: Factors that Contribute to Social Vulnerability
12
• How do personal
attributes and living
situations affect
vulnerability?
• How do finances
contribute to
recovery?
• Age
• Income
• Residence Type
• Tenure Type
• Employment
• Linguistic isolation
• Household type
• Physical mobility
• Homeowners/
Renters insurance
• Health insurance
• Debt and savings
• Car ownership
• Reciprocity
• Sense of efficacy
• Cooperation
• Social and civic
participation
• Community and
emotional support
• Network size
• Communication
• Common action
• Bonding
• Bridging
• Linking
• Isolation
• Major cities
• Inner regional
• Outer regional
• Remote
• Very remote
• Local government
collaboration
• State assistance
• Funding
• How do social
networks affect
vulnerability?
• How does an
individual’s
relationship to
communities
contribute to
recovery?
• How do state and
local risk
management
policies affect
vulnerability?
• How does federal
funding contribute
to recovery?
• How does access
to community services and
support affect vulnerability?
• How does
proximity to important infrastructure
and services
contribute
to recovery?
Individual in a
Household Community Access to
Services
Organizational/
Institutional
Guiding Questions
Possible Indicators
Adapted from: Dwyer, et al., 2004
The topic of social vulnerability is of emerging interest in California and the San Francisco Bay Area. “The
Climate Gap,” highlights linkages between climate change, human rights, public health and social fairness.
The report explored the ways that heat waves and increased air pollution will disproportionately impact
low income families and people of color, the elderly and young children. Factors such as the costs of
basic necessities, limited job opportunities and the inability to afford insurance could lead to dispropor-
tionate burdens from climate change impacts (Morello-Frosh, et al., 2009). As researchers in this report
conclude:
What hasn’t made headlines –yet – is the climate gap: the disproportionate and unequal
impact the climate crisis has on people of color and the poor. Unless something is done,
the consequences of America’s climate crisis will harm all Americans – especially those who
are least able to anticipate, cope with, resist and recover from the worst consequences
(Morello-Frosh, et al., 2009).
Conducting a social vulnerability analysis of a community or region to understand existing underlying
inequalities and the social context of vulnerability is an integral part of the process of developing strate-
gies for adapting to climate change.
In order to ensure that equity considerations are addressed in planning and emergency preparedness,
social vulnerability studies should include the following:
•
A socio-economic analysis of vulnerable communities;
•
A description of historic exposure and response to past hazards,
•
An understanding of community needs, resources and opportunities for cross-jurisdictional co
		 operation.
Previous studies can provide a framework to use as a starting point. For example, the guiding ques-
tions mentioned in Figure 2 suggest questions to consider, and existing studies from the San Francisco
Bay region provide guidance on populations that might be most vulnerable. It is important to note that
socially vulnerable communities can also possess many strengths that can prove essential during difficult
times. While these vary across neighborhoods, they can include a history of community organizing, strong
intergenerational ties, and ethnic and linguistic diversity.
2.3 ART Integrated Vulnerability Assessment Framework
Using a comprehensive framework that considers economy, society/equity, environment and governance,
the ART project is integrating social vulnerability in assessing critical infrastructure, services and institu-
tions. As illustrated above, a social vulnerability study improves understanding of household and com-
munity vulnerability to sea-level rise and storm events by identifying sensitive populations who may be
exposed to a coastal hazard. Considerations in a social vulnerability study include race, income, mobility,
social networks, access to disaster response services and community support, and organizational/govern-
ment response capacity. The study should also examine historic exposure to and impacts of hazards, and
incorporate community input to ensure that all vulnerable populations have been considered and have
‘ground-truthed’ the assessment.
13
Figure 3: Framework for Integrated Vulnerability Assessment
14
Figure 3 shows the assessment framework used in the ART project. Overarching this approach are the
four “frames” that guide the ART project: equity/society, economy, environment and governance. The ART
planning process involves multiple phases – project scoping and organization; assessing impacts, vulner-
abilities and risks; developing a plan; and implementing and monitoring adaptation strategies. During the
assessing impacts phase, a social vulnerability assessment is combined with an assessment of physical
vulnerability, including critical infrastructure, services and institutions within the study area. After com-
pleting an exposure analysis to understand climate impact projections using best available science for
the study area, project staff began to look at sensitivity and adaptive capacity. These were determined for
two primary topic areas: (1) community, economy and society (i.e., social vulnerability assessment); and
(2) critical infrastructure, services and institutions (i.e. physical vulnerability of critical assets). The final
product of this approach will be an integrated assessment that can be used to build resilience and define
an emergency and recovery response plan that will protect and preserve communities to the greatest
degree possible.
Exposure
Identify climate impacts
and projections for your
community or study area
Community, Economy
and Society
Sensitive populations, historic
exposure, community input,
economics and employment,
social capital
Critical Infrastructure,
Services and Institutions
Work with community
members to highlight physical
assets, infrastructure,
services and institutions that
the community and region
relies upon
Determine Sensitivity
and Adaptive Capacity
for...
Integrated Physical and Social
Vulnerability Assessment
that considers Economy, Equity/Society,
Environment and Governance
Understanding influences on vulnerability includes engaging stakeholders and gathering local knowledge.
For the ART project, a working group representing stakeholders in the study area and two subcommit-
tees were formed to meet regularly, review documents, and assist the project management team with
data needs and project design. From the beginning, the ART project team wanted to ensure that the
project was a collaborative effort because the people in the best position to understand the resources
in the project area, and develop strategies to protect these resources, are the people at the local and
county level who interact with them on a daily basis—from wastewater systems, to parkland to seaport
facilities. Since much of the responsibility and authority for undertaking adaptation lies at the local level,
the project was designed to ensure that local perspectives were included in an ongoing way throughout
the project. The working group and subcommittees have provided a valuable conduit through which the
project team has received informed input to help shape the project. The working group members have
defined many aspects of the project, including the asset categories to be evaluated, the climate impacts to
consider, and the overall scope and extent of the project.
2.4 Social Vulnerability in the ART Subregion
As part of the ART project, the Pacific Institute conducted an analysis of social vulnerability. The analysis
describes the demographics and social vulnerability of populations exposed to flooding under different
inundation scenarios. Results presented here describe two scenarios: populations exposed to 16” and
55” of sea level rise in combination with an extreme storm event (see footnote), also known as the 100-
year stillwater elevation1,2. The analysis presented here is for the ART study area, which encompasses the
shoreline of Alameda County, from Emeryville to Union City, and extending inland approximately a half a
mile beyond the area projected to be exposed to the 100-year stillwater elevation with an additional 55
inches of sea level rise.
Data sources used in this analysis include 2000 US Census data at the household and the census block
level. The analysis of social vulnerability was obtained through a publically available source from NOAA
Coastal Services Center. Through their online Digital Coast, social vulnerability data can be downloaded
for all US coastal states (http://www.csc.noaa.gov/digitalcoast/data/sovi). These results reflect the most
up-to-date understanding of demographic analysis, but social vulnerability cannot be predicted with com-
plete certainty. While data from the 2000 US Census represents the most reliable dataset to work with,
population demographics have likely changed significantly since then. In addition, certain populations with
increased vulnerability are not always fully represented in Census datasets, such as homeless individuals
and families. While this information is available at the county level, it is not broken down by geographic
area within the county. Finally, the social vulnerability analysis presents population demographics at the
census block level. This rougher scale of analysis obscures population variability within block groups.
In the ART project area, there are approximately 17,321 residents currently living in areas that would be
exposed to inundation under a 16-inch rise in stillwater elevation, and 80,063 exposed under a 55-inch
rise (Table 4) under the 100-year stillwater elevation. The percentage of the population at risk of flooding
15
1 The extreme storm event scenarios in the ART project show exposure to 16” and 55” above the current 100-year stillwater elevation, or
the tide elevation associated with an event having a 1% chance of occurring in any given year (also known as the 100-year storm event).
2 More information on the sea-level rise scenarios used in the ART project can be found here: http://risingtides.csc.noaa.gov/about.html.
within the study area (Table 4) under the 55” scenario is distributed as a percentage of population for
each city as Alameda (60%), Union City (20%), Oakland (18%), San Leandro (22%), Emeryville (16%), San
Lorenzo (25%) and Hayward (36%). The population at risk of inundation under the less severe scenarios
is substantially smaller, with as few as 1,952 people at risk under a gradual sea level rise scenario of 16
inches.
Table 4: Population at risk of inundation for sea level rise under a 100-year Stillwater Elevation,
by city
16
In New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina, individuals without a car, people of color, and low income
households were among those less likely to evacuate before the storm (Colten et al., 2008). Within the
ART study area, a number of social groups were analyzed for their exposure to sea level rise. These
include renter-occupied households, linguistically isolated households, households with no vehicle, low
income population and people of color (See Table 6 below).
Table 5: Percentage of each city’s population exposed to flood risk under a 100-year Stillwater
Elevation, by city
Source: Heberger and Moore, 2012
Source: Heberger and Moore, 2012
Alameda
Emeryville
Hayward
Oakland
San Leandro
San Lorenzo
Union City
Total
Source: Heberger and Moore, 2012
+16”
8,619
56
167
233
3,220
177
4,849
17,321
+55”
30,009
725
5,011
6,107
10,070
2,888
25,253
80,063
(for reference)
72,259
6,882
140,030
399,484
79,452
21,898
66,869
786,874
City Population
100-Year Stillwater
Alameda
Emeryville
Hayward
Oakland
San Leandro
San Lorenzo
Union City
Total
Source: Heberger and Moore, 2012
+16”
11.9%
0.8%
0.1%
0.1%
4.1%
0.8%
7.3%
2.2%
+55”
41.5%
10.5%
3.6%
1.5%
12.7%
13.2%
37.8%
10.2%
100-Year Stillwater
Table 6: Socially vulnerable households exposed sea level rise under a 100-year Stillwater Elevation,
by city
17
Source: Heberger and Moore, 2012
Approximately 9,100 (33%) of households at risk of inundation are occupied by renters, a population
less likely to have the means to reinforce buildings and to prepare for flood events. Linguistically isolated
populations are described by the US Census as households without a member over age 14 who ‘speaks
English well.’ Depending on the social networks available to these households, linguistic isolation could
prevent household members from accessing critical information about preparedness, response, and
recovery. As the evacuation of New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina demonstrated, car ownership is
another important marker of social vulnerability to storms and other coastal hazards. During a sudden
flood event, households without a vehicle may be a greater risk of harm because they lack the capacity
to evacuate. Income level is another demographic factor addressed in the ART vulnerability assessment.
For the purposes of the study completed by the Pacific Institute, low income was defined as households
earning less than 200% of the national poverty level. Low-income residents may have reduced means to
prepare for, respond to, and recover from flood events. Using this standard measure of poverty, 15,521
people (based on year 2000 Census data) within the study area would be at risk of exposure under the
100-year stillwater scenario. Communities of color (defined as non-white non-Hispanic population),
another demographic group addressed in the Pacific Institute study, have high rates of exposure to sea
level rise as well. Lastly, according to the 2000 Census data, 294 people live in correctional or nursing
institutions within the 100-year stillwater elevation scenario with 55” of sea level rise. The majority of
this population is located in the City of Alameda.
In addition to analysis of specific populations’ exposure to sea level rise, the Pacific Institute utilized a
social vulnerability (SOVI) index to estimate overall relative social vulnerability for different populations
within the study area. SOVI is a methodology used to account for the socio-economic conditions that
influence population vulnerability to a range of hazards, including hurricanes and flood events. Some of
the populations included in the SOVI scoring methodology are race, age, gender, renters, income and em-
ployment. NOAA provides a digital atlas where users can download SoVi scores by state for all coastal
Alameda
Emeryville
Hayward
Oakland
San Leandro
San Lorenzo
Union City
Total
Source: Heberger and Moore, 2012
+16”
1,319
23
10
73
290
9
357
2,081
+55”
5,139
285
213
1,128
732
121
1,497
9,115
+16”
248
3
4
27
126
2
233
643
+55”
891
33
137
262
339
26
861
2,549
+16”
280
3
4
20
68
1
72
448
+55”
1,012
33
86
427
179
28
252
2,017
+16”
1,218
13
20
97
483
15
851
2,697
+55”
5,172
168
980
3,267
1,352
339
4,243
15,521
+16”
3,055
26
70
169
1,471
44
3,586
8,421
+55”
11,926
334
2,561
4,833
4,733
770
18,465
43,622
Renter
occupied
households
Linguistically
isolated
households
Households
with no
vehicle
Low
income
population
People
of color
US states. For this analysis, data for SoVi scoring in the study area were downloaded directly from the
atlas. The SoVi methodology involves a principal component analysis of the factors depicted in Table 7.
This analysis was conducted for the entire state of California. Thus, SoVi findings provide a picture of
social vulnerability for the subregion relative to demographic trends across the state.
Table 7: Variables in Social Vulnerability Index Methodology
18
Source: Heberger and Moore, 2012
Percent African American
Percent Native American
Percent Asian and Hawaiian Islander
Percent Hispanic
Percent of population under 5 years of age
Percent of population age 65 and over
Median age
Percent female population
Average number of people per household
Percent renter occupied units
Percent female headed households, no spouse present
Nursing home residents per capita
Percent civilian unemployment
Per capita Income (2000 dollars)
Percentage of households earning 100,000 or more
Percent living below the poverty level
Mean House Value
Mean contract rent for renter occupied housing units
Number persons per 100,000 population employed as healthcare
practitioners and technical occupations
Percent rural farm population
Percent of housing units that are mobile homes
Percent of population 25 years or older with no high school diploma
Percent of population participating in the labor force
Percent females participating in the labor force
Percent employment in farming, fishing, and forestry occupations
Percent employed in transportation, communications, and other public utilities
Percent Employed in service industry
Percent of population collecting social security benefits
Percent Foreign Born Citizens Immigrating between 1990 and 2000
Percent urban population
Housing Density
Source: Heberger and Moore, 2012
Variable
The SOVI methodology combines these factors into a composite score using principal component analy-
sis to provide a picture of overall social vulnerability within a specific area. The Social Vulnerability Index
for the ART study area group populations as high, medium and low based on the scoring index
(See Table 8).
Table 8: Social Vulnerability Ranking of Populations within the study area for 100-year Stillwater
Elevation, by city
19
Source: Heberger and Moore, 2012
High
Medium
Low
+16”
8,619
1,730
4,241
2,648
56
0
0
56
167
69
0
98
233
49
176
8
3,220
1,077
1,879
265
177
0
177
0
4,849
2,700
1,632
516
17,320
5,625
8,104
3,591
+55”
30,009
8,146
13,429
8,404
725
0
0
725
5,011
3,668
1,203
141
6,107
4,070
1,777
261
10,070
2,761
5,965
1,344
2,888
0
2,888
0
25,253
8,879
14,469
1,905
80,065
27,554
39,730
12,780
High
Medium
Low
High
Medium
Low
High
Medium
Low
High
Medium
Low
High
Medium
Low
High
Medium
Low
High
Medium
Low
Source: Heberger and Moore, 2012
Alameda (total)
100-Year Stillwater
Emeryville (total)
Hayward (total)
Oakland (total)
San Leandro (total)
San Lorenzo (total)
Union City (total)
Entire Study Area (total)
Thirty four percent of the 82,048 people at risk of inundation under the 100-year extreme storm event
fall within the category of high social vulnerability. An additional 39,730 or 50% are considered in the
middle range of social vulnerability. Sorting the population vulnerability into the seven cities in the study
area allows us to identify where the more vulnerable populations are located. As Table 8 depicts, Union
City, Alameda, and Oakland have the largest populations that fall within the “high” score for social vulner-
ability.
2.5 Adapting to Rising Tides – Equity and Sea-Level Rise Survey
2.5.1 Survey Purpose and Methods
The attitudes, perceptions and beliefs of stakeholders play an important role in influencing decision-
making. Surveys have proven an effective tool for gathering information about these trends and for
understanding the diverse perspectives of stakeholders (NOAA, 2007). ART project staff developed and
administered a survey to the ART working group, advocacy groups, local governments, community lead-
ers and non-profit organizations. For the ART working group, a vulnerability and risk assessment survey
went to asset managers in the ART study area. The survey asked mangers to assess the sensitivity, adap-
tive capacity and consequences associated with sea-level rise and storm events on specific assets. The
final section included questions on equity and sea level rise. A separate survey that included the same
equity questions was sent out to survey participants who were not assessing asset-specific vulnerability.
This survey went out to a diverse range of participants across the Bay Area. This included the Oakland
Climate Action Coalition, the Equity Working Group of Plan Bay Area, equity email lists, and to a broad
network of non-profit and public agencies working with diverse communities across the region address-
ing a broad range of issues, including social and environmental justice, public health, emergency services,
climate change adaptation, community engagement and community planning.
The equity and sea-level rise survey asked survey participants:
•
Ways that a diverse range of practitioners define resilience in the context of equity;
•
Specific equity concerns in analyzing and adapting to sea-level rise;
•
Barriers to integrating equity into adaptation; and
•
Major success stories that can be built upon for future sea level rise planning efforts.
Both surveys were disseminated from January to March 2012. An online survey instrument called Survey
Monkey was used to distribute the survey to participants. In total, 73 participants took the survey. Of
those, 53 participated in the larger vulnerability and risk survey, and 20 took the survey as a stand alone
survey that just included the questions on equity.
20
21
2.5.2 Results
Vulnerable Populations
Recent work on planning for sea level rise and extreme storm events has begun to highlight specific pop-
ulations who might be particularly sensitive to impacts. The survey asked participants to identify popula-
tions they felt would be most affected and/or disproportionately burdened by sea level rise and flooding.
Respondents were also given the opportunity to write in populations that were not listed in the survey.
In addition, survey participants could check as many of the populations listed as they thought relevant,
so response count does not add up to total below. Response percent is percentage of total respondents
who answered the question who chose that answer. This is true for all tables listed below that include
response percent.
Figire 9: Social Vulnerability Score by Block Group
Table 10: Potentially Vulnerable Populations
22
Three populations stood out as the greatest concern to survey participants: persons with limited mobil-
ity or with a disability, low income populations and seniors over 75. Some participants highlighted the
need for more information to identify sensitive populations. Others emphasized that all people exposed
to a climate impact will be greatly affected.
Priority considerations for integrating equity into sea-level rise planning
Survey participants provided a wealth of information and ideas to consider for addressing equity in the
context of sea level rise. Issues related to this topic were broad and covered diverse areas. The table
below describes the primary areas of concern for survey participants.
Of these areas of concern, flooding of critical infrastructure and/or neighborhoods in low income com-
munities, economic effects and public health were the rated highest. However, most areas were rated
relatively high. The issues that were raised most consistently can be broken into two broad categories:
engaging vulnerable populations and funding for climate change adaptation. The following sections will
elaborate on survey responses in these two areas.
Engage Vulnerable Populations
The need to create accessible and engaging educational opportunities for diverse audiences, particularly
for highly affected communities, was raised consistently in survey responses. Participants noted the im-
portance of making information relevant and accessible to local communities. Clear, accessible communi-
cation was emphasized. This includes developing easy to understa nd materials with translations for non-
English speaking populations. Education and outreach materials would need to draw clear connections to
relevant resources to carry out suggested actions for residents, and by doing so would empower action
on the local level. One participant noted: “Leadership at the community level is necessary to motivate
and inspire local action that can be embraced by the community as a whole.”
Low income people
Persons with limited mobility or with a disability
Seniors over 75
People of color
Households with no vehicle
Households with limited English proficiency
Renters
Institutionalized populations
(People in hospitals, nursing homes and prisons)
Total who answered question
51
41
33
32
28
26
21
12
68
75%
60%
49%
47%
41%
38%
31%
18%
Populations Response
Count
Response
Percent
23
Figure 11: Primary Areas of Concern for Equity and Sea Level Rise
Response
Count
Response
Percent
Flooding of critical infrastructure and/or
neighborhoods in low income communities
(e.g. Overwhelmed flood protection channels and storm drains
increase flooding in low lying areas, inundation of existing private
and public infrastructure and critical facilities; structures, including
shoreline protection, that are not adequately protected, elevated or
flood-proofed are destroyed or damaged)
40 59%
39 57%
34 50%
31 46%
28 41%
27 40%
26 38%
26 38%
25
68
Total who answered
37%
Economic effects (e.g., Increased cost of repair and maintenance
after flood events slows recovery in communities of concern,
ost wages and higher productivity in the region during recovery
periods; higher insurance rates due to greater flood risks)
Public health (e.g., Health impacts of contamination from sewage
distribution and treatment systems; groundwater intrusion into
contaminated sites and remobilized contaminants)
Public access, ecosystems and recreation (e.g., Loss of
trails, beaches, vistas, other shoreline recreation areas and public
access to shoreline over time; loss of tidal habitat which can
reduce flood protection benefits of tidal marsh and mudflats
to inland communities)
Emergency preparedness and/or disaster response
(e.g., Greater consequences from earthquakes due to elevated
groundwater levels; poor quality and quantity of emergency
response services in communities of concern)
Transportation justice (e.g., Disruption to key transportation
services for disadvantaged communities)
Disaster recovery (e.g., Increased cost of repair and maintenance
after flood slows recovery in communities of concern; disadvantaged
communities bear disproportionately high burden of effects; longer
duration or disruption of access to goods, particularly in low income
communities)
Institutional/Governance (e.g., Greater demands on agencies to
plan for and manage infrastructure/resources; building codes and land
use policies and practices inadequate to address sea level rise impacts)
Effects on community services (e.g., Longer duration or
disruption of access to services particularly in low in communities)
Multiple survey participants also noted that accessible communication should include explaining decision-
making processes and specific ways community members can participate. Meeting accessibility was also
raised consistently, both in providing childcare and transit accessible locations, and also in scheduling
community meetings during times and locations when working people can attend. Survey participants
also suggested that outreach and education extend to school-aged children and educators. Bringing
communities to the shoreline for recreation and education was emphasized. One participant said: “It is
critical to bring communities to the shoreline and other impacted areas to make the issue of sea level
rise tangible and pertinent.”
Specific suggestions included field trips, science projects, geo-caching, community mapping, training stu-
dents in emergency response, summer camps, block parties and neighborhood barbeques. Educational
opportunities could involve local partners and community groups as well as government agencies work-
ing collaboratively.
Responses also emphasized the need to partner with local community groups and leaders on climate
change and sea level rise issues. Working at the neighborhood level has a number of benefits in improv-
ing collaborative relationships between community groups and government entities. Survey participants
strongly emphasized the importance of planners reaching out to vulnerable groups through community
organizations. In addition, participants noted the need for better communication between government
agencies and community organizations on equity issues. A wide range of community groups were men-
tioned as potential resources, such as: faith-based organizations, senior centers, hospices, youth organiza-
tions, libraries, recreation centers, homeowners association, school PTAs, police and fire stations, local
business districts, parks, sports groups and local interpretive centers. Using community resources such
as these allows managers, decision-makers and local leaders to dialogue, collaborate with and collect
feedback from local residents, provide forums to educate the public, and to conduct outreach in places
where local people already spend time.
Survey participants also emphasized the need to learn from past mistakes. In examples like Hurricane
Katrina, equity issues were not sufficiently considered in disaster response planning, which increased the
number of people in harm’s way and slowed recovery for many communities. One participant explained
how the need for learning from past environmental disasters fits into a larger framework for engaging
and educating local communities.
There is a need for positive, solution oriented education and outreach, and a strong
commitment to remaining engaged for the long term, as well as stepped up public
education about infrastructure vulnerabilities, and about neighborhoods that are
particularly vulnerable. There also needs to be better public education about lessons
learned from Katrina and other major environmental disasters.
Another component to engaging and educating the public was emphasizing the full participation of
community members in planning for sea level rise and extreme storm events. As one survey participant
noted, “One of the biggest challenges to addressing equity issues in this context is to ensure that local
communities are engaged and responsible for the decisions that are made in response to sea level rise
and storm events.” Early engagement in decision-making processes was noted as a being a significant
factor for meaningful community participation. Survey participants noted the importance of existing local
24
planning efforts considering equity, including transportation, disaster preparedness, and land use planning
efforts. Sensitive populations, such as those identified in this survey, should be given special consider-
ation in these efforts. Interagency coordination on equity issues was also mentioned, including the need
to develop coordinated responses, and to establish better collaboration among agencies. Finally, a small
number of survey responses noted that a policy response was needed for prioritizing equity in agency
mandates and planning efforts.
Funding Climate Change Adaptation Planning
Funding research and planning on climate change adaptation for sea level rise is a high priority for people
in the San Francisco Bay Area. Survey participants raised concerns about the need to fund: planning for
vulnerable populations, supporting community engagement and protecting critical assets that provide
important services and access for diverse populations in the region. One survey participant said:
Agencies need to invest in continual community participation throughout the process,
from research to planning to implementation. This means leveraging funding sources
that local governments are eligible for to bring additional funding to community
stakeholders to participate in the process.
In a time of limited funding and slow economic recovery, finding ways to fund adaptive measures for criti-
cal facilities, infrastructure and communities that will be affected by sea level rise and storm events is a
difficult challenge. An important strategy for making funds stretch farther is to work collaboratively and
to leverage existing community resources to reach wider and more diverse audiences. Vulnerable popu-
lations, such as the ones identified in this survey may require extra assistance in evacuating during an
emergency, or additional resources to deal with rising waters in their neighborhoods and homes.
Funding community engagement was also identified as an important priority. Community engagement can
mean partnering or leveraging resources to work with community organizations, neighborhood groups,
non-profit organizations or other entities. Many community groups can play key roles in engaging resi-
dents, educating vulnerable populations, supporting community planning efforts and providing valuable
leadership and insight to community decision-making processes. This can include developing information
on sea-level rise and disaster preparedness for local residents, advocating for socially vulnerable popula-
tions in planning and, if relevant, sharing past experiences from disaster response that can inform planning
efforts. Funding opportunities suggested by survey participants include participation grants to organi-
zations who want to get involved in a decision-making or planning process, regional funding for park
protection, funding to reduce damage to private property, identifying funding sources for protection and
relocation, and funding for infrastructure improvements in vulnerable communities.
2.5.3 Resilience and Equity
Survey participants were asked how they would envision a resilient, socially just response to the commu-
nity impacts of sea level rise and storm events. Responses included a broad range of constructive ideas
to consider. They emphasized the importance of prior planning for vulnerable populations and protection
of critical infrastructure, the need to engage the public and improve our understanding of the existing
condition of critical flood protection structures, the need to integrate planning for sea level rise and
25
storm events with other climate change impacts, and an ecologically-based response that links environ-
ment, social equity and public health. In addition, the importance of community-based emergency pre-
paredness was frequently mentioned so that all neighborhood residents would know what to expect and
how to respond in an emergency.
Protecting vulnerable populations from sea level rise was highlighted as being another priority for com-
munity resilience. Investing in a community planning effort to develop a Climate Adaptation Plan was em-
phasized. Such a plan would include multi-stakeholder engagement, an inventory of community assets and
needs, community-based implementation of actions, and adaptive management practices. One participant
noted:
A resilient, socially-just response to the community impacts of sea level rise would
include an open flow of information, communication and dialogue starting very early
in the process of adaptation planning.
Specific guidance given by survey respondents included: preventing development in low-lying areas, devel-
oping a Climate Gap Neighborhood Action Plan for vulnerable communities, improving the levee protec-
tion system, involving fire and police officers in community planning, low-impact development (LID) and
green infrastructure to improve flood capacity and reduce storm water runoff, and wetland restoration
to protect communities. Survey respondents also suggested training community members in disaster
preparedness.
2.5.4 Discussion
The results of this survey provide a rich resource on major issues related to equity and sea level rise in
the San Francisco Bay Area. Survey participants represented a broad range of people and perspectives,
from city planners and social justice advocates to educators and emergency managers. Participants raised
important issues about the need to create opportunities for meaningful engagement in vulnerable com-
munities, and guidance on how to do so.
Survey respondents represented two groups, with some overlap between them. The first group included
members of the ART working group, which includes local, state and federal governments and agencies.
The second group included local experts, organizations and agencies working specifically on social and
environmental justice, advocacy, climate change and sustainability. While these groups may be perceived
as holding different perspectives on the issue of sea level rise, climate change adaptation and equity, their
perspectives had a great deal in common, in particular the need to engage local community members,
identify and fund community-based adaptation, and build resilience by protecting vulnerable communities.
The education, outreach and engagement of stakeholders were consistent themes in survey responses.
This came through from feedback on making planning and decision-making accessible to diverse audienc-
es, clearly communicating the implications of climate change impacts on communities, bringing commu-
nity organizations and leaders to the table and investing in education of all ages. In addition, the impor-
tant role of funding for climate change adaptation was raised consistently. Survey respondents provided
a number of suggestions for potential sources of funding, and ways to allocate funding that can improve
equity outcomes for communities.
26
3. Tools for Understanding Equity in
Planning for Climate Change
The following section summarizes three examples of planning processes or projects that integrate equity
into decision-making. In the first example, San Luis Obispo and Fresno counties commissioned studies of
social vulnerability to help them in identifying climate change adaptation options. In the second example,
the Plan Bay Area long-range regional planning effort led jointly by the Metropolitan Transportation Com-
mission and the Association of Bay Area Governments used an analytical approach to quantify equity to
inform integrated land use and transportation planning in the San Francisco Bay Area. The third example
highlights projects that engaged local communities, and specifically recognized the needs of vulnerable
populations.
3.1 Integrating Social Vulnerability into Adaptation Planning--Fresno
and San Luis Obispo Counties
As described in the previous section, social vulnerability studies can be used to inform a larger planning
process by identifying sensitive populations and communities. Two examples of how this approach was
used within adaptation planning are Fresno and San Luis Obispo counties. The studies were conducted to
provide a picture of social systems susceptible to climate impacts and were part of a larger project led
by the Local Government Commission and the GEOS Institute. Major findings were utilized in work-
shops that engaged local governments (including elected leaders, public health officials, citizens, planners
and land managers) in developing adaptation strategies. Separate workshops addressed natural systems
and socioeconomic systems in 2009-2010. The studies examined communities and populations, economic
activities and services and infrastructure. Researchers analyzed these factors for their exposure, sensi-
tivity and adaptive capacity to climate-related impacts. Climate risks that were found to affect different
populations in San Luis Obispo County are shown below.
27
Table 12: Climate Risks to Populations Across Different Components of Vulnerability in San Luis
Obispo County
28
From: (Moser and Ekstrom, 2010)
Researchers considered exposure of floodplain residents to flooding from gradual sea-level rise as well
as from extreme storms. A number of populations were identified as particularly at risk within the flood-
plain. For example, students and institutionalized populations would be particularly disadvantaged in a
disaster. For students, this is due to lack of a vehicle and (in some cases) long distances from family mem-
bers, particularly for foreign students. For institutionalized populations (including prisons and hospitals),
many are reliant on others for evacuation or support during a disaster (Moser and Ekstrom, 2010).
The study found that populations and individuals with reduced adaptive capacity include those with
lower educational attainment, linguistic and cultural isolation, limited mobility and renters. High rates of
poverty experienced by these populations combined with other demographic factors mentioned above
reduced their capacity to cope with and adapt to climate impacts. In contrast, community organizations,
social relations, religious communities and other forms of strong community relationships enhanced
disaster preparedness and ultimately, community resilience. Many community groups provide spiritual,
emotional and physical support to members in times of need. These groups can improve social networks,
reduce isolation and build preparedness for communities exposed to hazards (Moser and Ekstrom, 2010).
In San Luis Obispo and Fresno counties, addressing social vulnerability in the assessment phase of the
planning process allowed planners and community members to clearly identify the specific climate
change adaptation needs of different populations within both counties. The projects also developed
opportunities for more collaboration and coordination across jurisdictions by involving a diverse con-
stituency in the planning processes, and through selection of adaptation strategies that promote these
connections.
Exposure
Sensitivity
Adaptive Capacity
Floods
Heat
Drought
Wildfire
Heat
Air pollution
Drought
Floods
Heat
Sea-level rise
Floodplain residents
Outdoor workers
Farmers, water users
Homes at wildland-
urban interface
Infants, elderly
Asthma sufferers, children
Farmers
Institutionalized populations,
low-income residents
Low-income residents
Coastal residents, structures
and facilities
Populations Response
Count
Response
Percent
The studies of existing and future stressors on social systems in San Luis Obispo and Fresno counties
enabled workshop participants to identify their highest priorities for adaptation and communities of
special concern within the two counties. The workshops also had the positive effective of opening up
the conversation about climate change for communities that had not previously engaged on this sub-
ject (Moser and Ekstrom, 2011). In San Luis Obispo County, findings from the social vulnerability study
informed recommended strategies. Adaptation considerations were categorized based on their relevance
to socioeconomic systems, species and ecosystems. Socio-economic interventions included targeted edu-
cation and outreach on emergency preparedness in especially vulnerable communities, and consideration
of cultural and linguistic needs during planning activities. Local governments will consider the results of
this project during general plan updates, greenhouse gas emission inventories and creation of climate
action plans. In particular, the county is moving ahead with a climate action plan that will consider most, if
not all, of the strategies laid out in the project report (Koopman, et al., 2010).
3.2 Measuring Equity: Plan Bay Area’s Equity Analysis Framework
Plan Bay Area is developing a state-mandated regional sustainable communities strategy (SCS) for the San
Francisco Bay Area. Led by Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) and the Association of Bay
Area Governments (ABAG) and in partnership with the San Francisco Bay Conservation and Develop-
ment Commission (BCDC) and the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD), the goal of
the effort is to create a SCS on requirements laid out in 2008 Senate Bill 3753 for development of an in-
tegrated land use and transportation plan for the region with the goal of reducing per-capita greenhouse
gas emissions.
Regional agencies are evaluating ten performance targets for Plan Bay Area. These include specific targets
for climate protection (reducing per-capita emissions), adequate housing, healthy and safe communities,
open space and agricultural preservation, equitable access4, economic vitality and transportation system
effectiveness. These performance measures were evaluated across five alternative land use scenarios, that
reflect varying levels of concentrated housing and job growth around transit centers in the inner urban
core of the Bay Area. In December 2011 project staff presented a preliminary analysis of how the five
alternative scenarios achieve the performance measures. The public process for review of this analysis is
ongoing, and regional agencies adopted a preferred scenario in May 2012.
Equity is a central component of the overall planning process because Plan Bay Area leaders recognize
that it promotes improved access and quality of life for residents of the San Francisco Bay Area (Kirkey,
2011). As part of this effort, the Equity Working Group was created to advise on major equity issues
for the region such as housing, affordable transportation and access to livable wages. Members of the
working group include leaders from non-profit organizations, advocacy groups and government agencies.
Some agencies and organizations represented include local governments, the National Coalition for Asian
Pacific American Community Development, Urban Habitat, regional agencies and the Bay Area Health In-
29
3 SB 375, or the Sustainable Communities and Climate Protection Act of 2008, enhances California’s ability to implement AB 32. It requires that
that State’s 18 metropolitan planning organizations develop “Sustainable Communities Strategies” to establish greenhouse gas emission targets
for 2020 and 2035 through integrated land use and transportation planning.
4 The performance target for equitable access is to decrease the share of low-income and lower-middle income residents’ household income
consumed by transportation and housing by 10%.
equities Initiative. In addition to its advisory role, the Equity Working Group is developing an equity analy-
sis framework to support the assessment of different land use scenarios in addition to the ten adopted
performance targets described above.
The working group’s analysis focused on identifying communities of concern and applying equity-related
performance measures for evaluating different scenarios, and then comparing results or likely outcomes
for communities of concern across the region (MTC, 2011). The Equity Working Group utilized a de-
mographic and spatially based approach5 to define communities of concern within the San Francisco
Bay Area as they pertain to the planning and investment decisions under consideration in the Plan Bay
Area process. Across census tracts, communities of concern are those that have (1) four or more of the
factors listed in Table 13, or (2) communities that have concentrations of both low-income and minor-
ity populations at or above the thresholds described in Table 13 (One Bay Area, 2011). A concentration
threshold (i.e., the percentage of population in a census tract with a specific demographic factor) de-
scribes the level at or above which that demographic factor is considered a characteristic of a potential
community of concern.
Table 13: Factors for communities of concern
30
5 Census tract data based on the American Community Survey 2005-2009
Source: MTC (2012)
Using an analytical approach, 305 out of 1,405 census tracts in the San Francisco Bay Area have been
identified as communities of concern. Current analysis of the five Plan Bay Area scenarios for equity-re-
lated performance measures show mixed results. Table 14 depicts how the five scenarios perform under
five equity measures chosen by the Equity Working Group. These metrics incorporate housing cost and
income forecasts, transportation cost, displacement risk, non-commute and commute travel time.
The first measure, housing + transportation, is the share of average household income spent on the
combined the cost of housing and transportation. These numbers represent a percent change of 0.7%
Minority
Low Income (<200% of Poverty)
Limited English Proficiency
Zero-Vehicle Households
Seniors 75 and over
Population with a Disability
Single-Parent Households
Cost-Burdened Renters
54%
23%
9%
9%
6%
18%
14%
10%
70%
30%
20%
10%
10%
25%
20%
15%
Factor % of Regional Population
(in nine counties)
% of Concentration
Threshold
Source: MTC, 2012
to 13.1% from the base year of 2005 (One Bay Area, 2011). The measure for displacement risk links new
development in each scenario to the probability that current residents will be affected by changes in the
housing market. Cost-burdened renters paying more than 50% of household income on rent were identi-
fied as at-risk for displacement is new housing in desirable areas drives up cost. In the scenarios analyzed,
displacement risk is significantly higher for communities of concern than for the remainder of the region.
Vehicle miles travelled (VMT) density is a measure of VMT per day per square kilometer of developed
area (One Bay Area, 2011). It is used to forecast increased exposure to a variety of risks such as noise,
collisions and emissions due to heavy traffic on major roadways in close proximity to communities of
concern. Commute and non-commute travel time do not show significant variation between communi-
ties of concern and the remainder of the region. This is, in part, due to the fact that travel times reflect
a variety of choices travelers make abut where, when and how to travel. Travel times are influenced by
congestion, but also by individual choices to take less expensive modes that take longer (such as walking,
biking or taking transit) or costlier modes (such as driving).
Table 14: Equity Analysis of Plan Bay Area Scenarios
31
Source: MTC (2012)
During this iteration of Plan Bay Area, the ways that sea-level rise and climate change may cause dispro-
portionate burdens for communities of concern were not addressed explicitly. However, it is reason-
able to assume that certain climate change-related issues will negatively affect many of the performance
metrics. For example, Figure 15 below depicts communities of concern within the area affected by the
projected ART 100-year stillwater elevation sea level rise scenario.
The Equity Working Group took an analytical approach to characterizing communities of concern and
developing performance metrics for development of a sustainable land use and transportation plan for
the region. These quantitative targets can help to shape policies and planning priorities for the region
Base Yr.
Scenario
1
2
3
4
5
77%
77%
84%
85%
85%
85%
41%
43%
44%
44%
44%
44%
n/a
38%
40%
35%
35%
30%
n/a
10%
10%
7%
7%
7%
n/a
2,900
3,100
2,900
3,000
2,800
n/a
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,100
12.2
12.8
12.9
12.7
12.7
12.5
12.5
13.1
13.1
12.9
12.9
12.8
25.4
28.5
27.6
27.3
27.4
27.3
27.1
28.7
28.7
27.7
27.8
27.8
House-holds <
$38k/yr
(2010)
House-holds >
$38k/yr
(2010)
COC* Remainder
of Region
Remainder
of Region
COC Remainder
of Region
COC Remainder
of Region
COC
1. Housing +
Transportation
2. Displacement
Risk
3. VMT
Density
4. Non-
Commute
Travel Time
5. Commute
Time
Source: MTC, 2012
that improve equity conditions. The use of quantitative metrics also introduces a challenge because these
metrics can prove inflexible and incapable of fully capturing the complex factors that affect struggling
communities. Other factors that might be important determinants of Communities of Concern could
include educational access and attainment, community and family support and relationships, and histories
of community engagement and organizing. Addressing such issues with this assessment methodology
could add greater richness and complexity to equity analysis in future planning and community engage-
ment efforts. The Plan Bay Area process illustrates that raising equity issues proactively within an inte-
grated region-wide planning effort encourages greater collaboration across agencies, non-profit organiza-
tions and community groups.
32
Figire 15: Communities of Concern within the ART 55” plus 100-year
Flood Inundation Area
Source: MTC, AECOM
3.3 Integrating Equity into Sea-Level Rise and Flood
Protection Projects
Just as large-scale planning processes and research can integrate equity considerations, so can individual
projects. Projects that engage and educate local communities, improve flood protection, and restore
habitats can have particular benefits for disadvantaged communities. Several such projects exist in the
San Francisco Bay area. The Integrated Regional Water Management Program (IRWMP) supports water
supply and water quality projects that specifically benefit sensitive populations. The projects are intended
to alleviate flooding and improve stormwater systems. Among project priorities are inclusion of local
employment and training opportunities, focusing efforts in disadvantaged schools and areas of high risk
of exposure to toxins, and providing flood hazard mapping to these communities. A number of projects
have been proposed, including floodplain mapping, stream restoration and technical assistance to various
disadvantaged communities across the San Francisco Bay Area.
One project-level approach to addressing equity is to engage and educate local communities and stu-
dents, and to encourage participation in ecological restoration practices that improve flood protection.
The STRAW Project or Students and Teachers Restoring a Watershed, is led by PRBO Conservation
Science and supports watershed and restoration planning and implementation in Marin, Sonoma, Alam-
eda, Napa and Solano Counties. The project provides scientific and technical resources to teachers and
students, and provides opportunities for students in grades K-12 from local communities to participate in
wetland restoration projects. The STRAW project is shifting toward greater integration of climate change
research into design of future projects, and began implementing climate-adapted restoration techniques
in 2011.
Community members can also participate in data collection and scientific studies to improve our under-
standing of how to alleviate flooding issues today and in the future. Restoration Design Group and a local
non-profit, Urban Tilth, will implement one such project in Richmond, CA along Wildcat Creek and San
Pablo Creek. The primary project purpose is to develop priorities for restoration and flood risk abate-
ment in disadvantaged communities in North Richmond, which was identified as a high overall priority
in the Wildcat Creek Restoration Plan. Local students from Contra Costa Community College will be
hired to collect data, and school teachers and administrators will integrate the project into course credit
and curriculum. The final stream design guidance will inform a larger creek restoration design project for
a commercial business district in an economically depressed with high unemployment (IRWMP 2011). A
similar project has been proposed for the mapping of floodplains with a focus on disadvantaged com-
munities across the San Francisco Bay Area. This project is led by the San Francisco Estuary Institute in
collaboration with a number of local partners. This analysis will focus on identifying flood prone areas in
low-lying disadvantaged communities. Outputs will be used in State and federal flood inventories, local
planning and research efforts and green infrastructure objectives (IRWMP, 2011).
There are other examples of project-level integration of sea level rise and equity. These projects often
illustrate themes such as engaging communities, improving mapping and technical capacity, collaborating
with local partners, improving flood protection and/or flood flow capacity and community participation
in ecological restoration.
33
3.4 Decision-Support Tools
Tools that help us analyze and understand the spatial patterns related to community and social change
can also support assessments of social vulnerability in a planning context. These decision support tools
provide frameworks for data management and analysis, and ready-to-use, locally relevant information.
Table 16 below lists some of the tools available that integrate socio-economics and equity into climate
change vulnerability analysis and adaptation options.
Table 16: Decision Support Tools to Support Equity Analysis and Socio-economic Considerations
34
The Social Vulnerability Index (SOVI) uses existing demographic data to identify social vulnerability trends
in communities. The eleven factors considered in SOVI include gender, age, race, occupation and renter/
owner. SOVI is an additive model that uses these factors to create an index of social vulnerability for the
United States (Cutter, 2003). The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) worked
with the University of South Carolina to produce a SOVI dataset for all US Census Block Groups in
Coastal US states.
Social Vulnerability Index
HAZUS
CRISTAL
Spatial Trends in Coastal
Socioeconomics
Coastal County Snapshots
Cal-Adapt
Analytical index of demographic
factors at the census tract level to
understand social vulnerabilities.
http://webra.cas.sc.edu/hvri/
products/sovi.aspx
http://www.fema.gov/plan/
prevent/hazus/
http://www.iisd.org/cristaltool/
http://coastalsocioeconomics
.noaa.gov/
http://www.csc.noaa.gov/
digitalcoast/tools/snapshots/
index.html
http://cal-adapt.org/
Allows users to examine potential
economic losses, physical damage
and social impacts from floods
and other hazards.
Decision support vulnerability
assessment tool that runs in excel,
focusing on community livelihood.
Provides reports of census data
for planners.
Provides county snapshots of
demographic trends, critical
infrastructure and land use
information for planners.
Web-based planning tool for
climate change adaptation –
depicts climate change risks for
specific areas across California.
Tool Name Description Website
Another tool, FEMA’s HAZUS, allows users to calculate potential monetary losses from floods and other
hazards, including providing an understanding of physical damage, economic losses and social impacts
(FEMA, 2011). These two tools offer established methodologies for analyzing social and demographic
trends as they relate to vulnerability and coastal hazards. CRISTAL, or Community-based Risk Screening-
Adaptation and Livelihoods, is a decision support tool that provides an accessible methodology for un-
derstanding social vulnerability. Running in Excel, the tool focuses on creating linkages between climate-
related risks and community livelihood.
Other tools provide information and reports to help planners better understand spatial distribution of
different demographic and social trends. NOAA’s Spatial Trends in Coastal Socioeconomics also provides
resources for understanding social aspects of vulnerability. It provides quick reports and census data for
coastal planners to use in analyses. NOAA’s Coastal County Snapshots also allows users to choose a
county and receive a broad array of demographic information about the county, such as income, popula-
tion and elderly population, as well as information about critical facilities and land use.
35
36
37
4. Conclusion
Consideration of equity in planning for sea level rise and storm events is becoming an increasingly press-
ing topic as coastal flooding and related impacts begin to affect more and more communities. As historic
responses to disasters show, equity and social factors can significantly increase impacts on communities.
If social vulnerability is addressed in planning and policy-making, the sensitivity of these communities to
hazards can be reduced, while opportunities can be created for renewal, reorganization and adaptation
during difficult times.
Social inequity can undermine a community’s capacity to respond and rebuild from hazards. In the case of
the city of New Orleans and Hurricane Katrina, a variety of factors resulted in communities and individu-
als being disproportionately affected by the storm. Decades of fast urban growth in low-lying vulnerable
areas and an extreme storm event, combined with these factors to cause serious devastation and hard-
ship for individuals, families, neighborhoods and the entire region. The economic, social and environmen-
tal impacts that resulted were much greater than what would have been experienced had social vulner-
ability been accounted for in disaster and recovery responses. A range of factors and small changes to
emergency response can influence community resilience. The most effective strategy for building resil-
iency is to engage local communities and to bring the wealth of local knowledge into decision making and
planning.
Climate change vulnerability studies conducted in San Luis Obispo and Fresno Counties illustrate the use
of participatory social vulnerability studies to identify disproportionate burdens as well as existing com-
munity strengths that could form building blocks for resiliency. Factors such as strong cultural ties, social
networks and strong relationships form the basis of resilient communities. In developing a response plan,
it can be just as essential for community planners to highlight these resiliency factors as it is to draw
attention to vulnerability. In the second case study, the Plan Bay Area Equity Working Group, with broad
representation from agencies and non-profits, developed performance measures to support equitable
land use and transportation planning. The measurable targets facilitated development of concrete mile-
stones for equity in the region to move toward continued advancement of reducing inequalities in
38
Equity and Sea Level Rise Planning Recommendations
Projects and programs that incorporate social vulnerability and equity in a way that will result in tangible
outcomes need to include the following:
(1) Understanding exposure and impacts
Projections of the scope, timing and geographic location of the hazard or hazards that may impact the
community.
(2) Social vulnerability analysis and understanding of sensitive demographics
Identification of the populations within that geographic location and the strengths and limitations of that
population. The SOVI analysis conducted in Fresno and San Luis Obispo and the ART project are all ex-
amples of this type of analysis. Other tools to conduct this work include census data, GIS, county assessor
data, decision support tools (see Table 16) and community input/feedback.
(3) Vulnerability of critical services, infrastructure and facilities
Understanding of the relationship between the services, infrastructure and other assets and the popula-
tion within the area that are projected to be exposed to the hazard or hazards. Identify the vulnerabilities
of these services and infrastructure and the potential impacts to the exposed population and how the
social vulnerabilities defined above will make these populations more or less sensitive and vulnerable to
the hazard or hazards.
(4) Collaborative process
Creation of a working group of people, partners and organizations representing the exposed community
to help ensure that your information is accurate and your work is relevant.
(5) Community engagement
Identify ways to engage communities, as illustrated by the STRAW project, to train and employ residents
and improve flood protection in urbanized watersheds to build capacity and attempt to reduce impacts.
(6) Integrated adaptation
Develop an adaptation response with the working group that is directly tied to the analysis of social
vulnerability, the vulnerability of the services, infrastructure and other assets, and focuses on building resil-
ience within the most vulnerable populations identified in the study area.
the context of land use and transportation planning. Finally, a number of projects were highlighted that
engage disadvantaged communities in data collection, restoration, education and improvement of flood
protection. Project-level actions that improve flood protection and involve the public can have significant
sea level rise adaptation benefits, especially when they are part of comprehensive planning frameworks. In
all of the case studies reviewed, analysis of social equity factors formed the basis for understanding over-
all community vulnerability, and clear linkages were made between efforts to reduce social vulnerability
and increased resiliency.
39
This white paper also synthesized results from a study completed by the Pacific Institute of socially
vulnerable populations within the ART study area. This study examined vulnerable populations across a
range of scenarios, from gradual sea level rise to extreme events. These scenarios help to paint a clearer
picture of exposure to coastal hazards and could help government officials to prioritize hazard response
and planning efforts. Identifying socially vulnerable populations and individuals and integrating these
findings into an overall climate change vulnerability analysis is the first step towards addressing equity in
planning for sea level rise.
The ART project will continue to address equity in the vulnerability assessment as well as in commu-
nication materials and outreach to diverse stakeholders within the region. Specifically, the results from
the social vulnerability analysis will be used to identify vulnerable communities and their proximity to
and reliance on critical infrastructure, facilities and assets, such as emergency response facilities, ground
transportation, hazardous waste sites and parks and recreation area. In addition, equity will be carried
into the adaptation phase of the ART project. While project staff is still working to develop a roadmap
for this portion of the project, the four overarching frames of society/equity, environment, economy and
governance will continue to guide the work.
Planning that addresses social vulnerability and equity can reduce the burden communities may experi-
ence due to climate hazards. The approaches reviewed here are part of a growing suite of best practices
for integrating analysis of equity issues into studies of sea-level rise vulnerability to inform adaptation and
resilience.



The major purpose of design is to create products, documents, illustrations, publications and, most importantly, product packages that possess strong visual impact and hold the attention of the viewers or consumers, so as to positively influence their buying behaviour. Product packages perform important roles in consumers’ purchase decisions (Poturak, 2014) . It is the main way that products are advertised and identified (Ryan, 2011) . It plays a major role in the success of any product or brand, hence, the need for proper packaging of products. However, packaging designs are not just done haphazardly. There are various theories and principles guiding the creation of effective package designs or package technology. This study evaluates, from the consumers’ perspective, the extent to which graphic theories and principles are generally put into practice in the creation of packaging designs.
Since theory is any system of ideas that help explain or speculate about why we do the things we do (Cezzar, 2014) ; therefore, this study views graphic design theory as any system of ideas that helps speculate or explain why designers do the things they do while designing. While graphic design theories are unique to graphic designs, graphic designers, however, regularly read and incorporate theories, or selective elements from such theories, from other areas of study such as art, architecture, economics, anthropology, sociology, technology or science. Reading and writing design theories is how designers speak to each other about the things that matter, and discover commonalities beyond day-to-day questions about business or technique. Theories also shift, and are built with culture and technology, as new relationships, tools and modes of consumption create new questions.
Over the years, despite the vast increase in the number of graphics designers, the world and its design problems have become more complex, and several approaches to solve these problems have proven to be relatively inefficient due to the ineffective use of knowledge or skill gained from experienced graphic designers. Perhaps, this points to the vital role that design terms and figures might have to play in improving the design discipline not only by encouraging continuity in skills and professionalism, but also by fostering future development.
As the graphic design discipline evolves, intellectual issues come into focus, and the outcomes of systematic inquiry grow in importance (Zimmerman & Forlizzi, 2008) . Design research is about observing existing and created design practices, formulating design theories and models for describing and improving design practices, and evaluating these design theories and models (Vermaas, Chakrabarti, & Blessing, 2014) . However, this study is not aimed at evaluating design theories; instead, it investigates graphic design theories and the very important role they play in packaging technology, as viewed by the students of the department of Industrial Design, Federal University of Technology, Akure. The researchers evaluate the level of adaptation or usage of a collection of selected design theories and practices as evident in design outputs, e.g., product package designs. This was evaluated from the perception of the consumers with appreciable knowledge of design theories and practices. Selected designers and design students possessing knowledge of design theories in the Faculty of Environmental Technology of the Federal University of Technology, Akure, are considered a suitable population to sample by the researchers.
2. Design Theories
Production of effective visual stimuli depends on validated or developed design theories. Various researchers have varying views as to what theories are. For example, Mautner (1996) considers theories as an exploration of a subject matter through the development of propositions. Weick (1989) views it as a disciplined imagination that proceeds like artificial selection, where the researcher defines, conducts and interprets imaginary experiments. Theories influence design practices and further design research, which in turn, dictates design outcomes. We are possibly on the verge of a revolution in design research that can advance beyond current forms of design practice and current research on design methodology (Dorst, 2008) and theory research. Changes and improvements are thus inevitable as research and practices are improved. Therefore, design theories are not only meant to serve as a guide to existing designers but also the future ones. But, are design theories really helpful in developing upcoming graphic designers? Do they possess any potential to influence future product package design practices?
In Nigeria, for example, many practitioners in the designing discipline claim to be “professional graphic designers” even amongst those without formal education, provided they have little knowledge of the use of one or two computer graphic design softwares like Photoshop or CorelDraw. Most of these self-acclaimed “professionals” obviously lack the appropriate knowledge of design theories, and when there is a lack of the knowledge of design theories, abuse of the elements of design is eminent. These possible abuses are prominent in many product package designs found in Nigeria today. For example, there are products out there whose package designs were made indiscriminately, i.e., not guided by any particular graphic design theory. The researchers herein refer to such package designs as non-graphic design theories-guided package designs. There are also products out there whose package designs were meticulously created and guided by appropriate graphic design theories. This is often obvious in the attractiveness or appealing nature of the packages. The researchers herein refer to such package designs as graphic design theories-guided package designs. The judgment pertaining to a package’s attractiveness or appeal was however left to the discretion of the respondents in this study. These two categories of package designs are compared especially in terms of how they influence the consumption rate or purchase preferences of consumers at the point of purchase.
Package designs are visual stimuli intended to inform, educate and persuade consumers favourably towards targeted products. Faimon and Weigand (2004) consider design as a plan for arranging elements in such a way as to accomplish a particular purpose. This purpose, in packaging, is primarily to stimulate the consumer into favourable buying behaviour. This professional discipline is facing such a time as scholars, researchers, and practitioners are devoting attention to creating categories for design practice and design research, articulating methods and processes and in some cases, building new design theories (Zimmerman & Forlizzi, 2008) in order to achieve this purpose. One of these theories is the Gestalt theory that was developed in the early twentieth century by German and Austrian Psychologists (Graham, 2008) . These psychologists were studying mental processes and, especially, how people organize and make decisions when exposed to visual stimuli (Lang, 1987; Graham, 2008) . Gestalt theory, for example, provides rational explanations why shifts in spacing, timing, and configuration can have a profound effect on the meaning of presented information (Graham, 2008) . While Gestalt visual principles are easy to grasp, they are very powerful. Ignoring Gestalt visual theory may result in unexpected interpretations by a viewer, observer or a consumer (Graham, 2008) . In practice, generally ignoring graphic design theories may not only lead to misinterpretation of information, but also misrepresentation and disarrangement which lowers appeal or attractiveness and so on. See figure 1.
Some other theories related to design include:
1) The colour theory
2) Functionalism
3) Symbolic Interaction
4) Change theory
5) Meaning of Place
6) Place Identity and
7) Social Cognition theory
Knowing which appropriate design theory to adopt for a design project or package design depends on various factors. For example, clients’ needs that relate to function will suggest the functionalism theory, while clients’ needs that relate to change in technology and the need to conform will suggest the use of the change theory. Summarily, the specific design theory a designer chooses to adopt depends on factors such as the purpose of the product whose package is being designed and the client’s specific needs.
Many of these design theories focus on aesthetic concepts including space planning, lighting, principles and elements of design; they draw on the elements and principles of design. But are graphic designers really guided by these design theories? Are graphic Designers really conscious of them in the process of creating effective package designs?

Figure 1. Possible simple misplacement of space and possible misinterpretation.
3. Graphic Design Elements and Principles
An everyday approach to exploring visual communication by graphic designers to unleash creativity and important life skills in order to meet and solve industry problems with solid visual, strategic, conceptual, typographical and technical skills is worth taken into consideration to help expand design horizon and meeting industry demands for graphics designers. Designers entering the field today must master an astonishing range of technologies (including principles and theories) and prepare themselves for a career whose terms and demands will constantly change (Armstrong, 2009) . However, there are some elements and principles of design that have stood the test of time. Some of them are:
3.1. Design elements
Graphic design elements are the building blocks of design. They include:
1) Lines
2) Shapes
3) Texture
4) Space
5) Size
6) Value
7) Colour
8) Balance
9) Rhythm
10) Emphasis
11) Unity
A simple misplacement of one of these elements may lead to gross misrepresentation or misinterpretation. See the figure 1 below as illustrated by Graham (2008) in the Gestalt theory.
3.2. Design Principles
Design principles govern the relationships between the elements used in the design, and organize the composition as a whole. Successful design incorporates the use of the principles to communicate the intended message effectively. They help designers organize the images and type on the page so that it feels more comfortable to viewers and makes a greater impact. The principles of design are:
1) Balance
2) Proximity
3) Alignment
4) Repetition
5) Contrast
6) White space
The elements and principles of design are universal, but designers have different perspectives towards the usage or application of these elements and principles in creation of effective package designs. Other design factors that influence the creation of product packages include typography and Illustration. Pensasitorn (2015) , in listing some of the vital elements that make up a package design, asserts that photos or images, illustration, combination of images and illustration and typography, with or without other elements, are mostly used in package designs. The misuse of any of these factors may result in undesirable outcomes. According to Roy (1998) , the brand name Coca-Cola in China was first rendered as “Ke-kou-ke-la”. That phrase means “bite the wax tadpole” or “female horse stuffed with wax” depending on the dialect. Unfortunately, the Coke company did not discover this until after thousands of signs had been printed. Coke then researched 40,000 Chinese characters and found a close phonetic equivalent, “kokou-ko-le”, which can be loosely translated as “happiness in the mouth”. A simple error in illustration or typographical adoption can amount to major misrepresentation and misinterpretation. Illustration and typography were rated by respondents against colour in this study to decipher their level of relevance to product packaging success.
4. Packaging
Packaging can play a very interesting role in the success or failure of a product. Its success depends a lot on how it is designed by its creators. While some may see it as a mere safeguard that has the sole purpose of protecting a product, others argue that the life and identity of the product lies within the package design. It has the power to influence your choices, and its carefully thought-out aesthetics can affect your emotions. It can bring your memories to life with its colours and can shape culture with its form (Alervall & Saied, 2013) .
Researchers may have divers views of what packaging is or is not, therefore, for the purpose of clarity, this study considers product packaging as any “container” by which or within which a product is offered to the market for sale, or by which necessary information about the product is passed across to the consumer. Packaging is the art, science, and industry of preparing goods for transport and sale. The package of a brand has its effects on the attitude of customers in relation to product (Parhizgar & Rostami, 2014) .
Research shows that consumers make about 50 to 70 per cent of their buying decisions at the point of sale (Platt, 2012) . It is also estimated that shoppers spend less than five seconds looking at a piece of packaging design (Burke & Leykin, 2014) . The main function of packaging is to sell the product at its point of purchase. Therefore, there is the need to think carefully about how products are packaged, as the success or failure of such products depends largely on the effectiveness of their packages.
Packaging performs some major functions:
1) Containment
2) Protection
3) Convenience of handling
4) Preservation
5) Providing information on product and, most importantly
6) Sales (including motivation)
Perhaps the two most important of them all are providing information on products and promotion of sales. These are best achieved through the principles, elements and/or theories of design, some of which are referred to by researchers as the elements of packaging. Packaging elements include visual elements and information elements. Visual elements include graphic, form, colour and size, while information elements include making information and production (Lehman, 1980) .
5. Graphic Design Application in Packaging Technology
Packaging is a multi-disciplinary process that involves professionals from various fields including graphic design. Eight of the most important ones are listed below. The following, as Schueneman and Tolletee (2010) suggest, is a partial listing of some of the professionals involved in the packaging technology:
1) Mechanical Engineers to design and fabricate package lines and package fabricating equipment.
2) Electrical Engineers for the controls of package manufacturing equipment, filling lines and other electro-mechanical functions.
3) Packaging Engineers to design and specify package systems, testing protocols and other requirements for the package.
4) Industrial Engineers to optimize material flow, logistics, and similar warehousing functions.
5) Chemical Engineers to design and help formulate new polymers and co-polymer systems for more effective barrier properties on flexible package systems.
6) Marketing Skills to present the product in the best possible light through the package system.
7) Medical Skills to help design and test package systems, medical and pharmaceuticals products.
8) The Designer.
The works of all the above mentioned skills or disciplines are, at the end, subject to the skills of the eighth professional involved in packaging technology, the designer, whose graphic skills are needed in creating packaging systems that are most appealing to consumers at the points of purchase. Using colour, shape, form and style, et cetera, packages now provide the primary marketing of most products (Schueneman & Tolletee, 2010) . Hence, it is expedient to ask: Are the aforementioned elements of design independent of graphic design theories in achieving the above stated purpose of marketing or sales? Are packaging systems more successful independent of graphic design theories-guided designers? This study aims at providing answers to these questions.
6. Research Questions
The following questions were developed for the purpose of this study:
1) Are most graphic designers guided by graphic design theories?
2) Do graphic design theories play important roles in packaging design?
3) Can packaging be more appealing without graphic design theory guides?
4) Is the influence of graphic design in packaging positive?
5) Are graphic design theories helpful in developing upcoming designers?
7. Research Hypothesis
One hypothesis was put forward to guide this study:
Hypothesis 1:
H0: There is no significant relationship between usage/application of graphic design theories and the creation of attractive graphic/package designs.
H1: There is a significant relationship between usage/application of graphic design theories and the creation of attractive graphic/package designs.
8. Research method
The study adopted the descriptive survey research method. Both primary and secondary data were used. Primary data were obtained through structured questionnaire. Respondents were quizzed based on their previous or recent experiences and current buying behaviours. A brief interaction or interview preceded the administration of the questionnaire. Secondary data included information obtained from published works.
The target population for the purpose of this study was selected designers and design students possessing knowledge of design theories, in the faculty of Environmental Technology within the adult age range, in the Federal University of Technology, Akure, Ondo state, Nigeria Census was adopted for the purpose of sampling the population since the population was finite. The sample size of 450 respondents was considered suitable for the study.
Descriptive statistical method was used to analyze the collected data; the method includes the use of frequency to express the number of respondents and their relations in percentages. Data were also analyzed using average mean, variance and standard deviation values to determine the importance of some effects as indicated by the respondent. The percentages and the cumulative percentages of variables of interest were also determined. Percentages help in rating a number of effects according to the degree of importance attached to them.
The indices were calculated as follow:
Mean is expressed as
𝑋=∑𝑓𝑥/𝑁 ,
where X =Mean, x = number of score, Σ = summation, N = Number of valid responses.
With 3.0 as the computed mean, the decision rule was to accept any factor with a mean of 3.0 and above as positively perceived by the respondents and, hence accepted (A), while regarding any factor with a mean below 3.0 as negatively perceived and, therefore, rejected (R). Chi-square was the statistical tool adopted for the testing of the hypothesis. The decision rule was to reject H0 if significance level (p-value) is less than alpha (α = 0.01, the predetermined significance level).
𝑋21=∑𝑛=1(𝑓𝑜−𝑓𝑒)2𝑓𝑒
where X2 = Chi-square, fo = Observed frequency, fe = expected frequency and n = differential factor.
A dichotomous analysis procedure, as used by Oladumiye, Odji, & Adelabu (2016) , in which responses were collapsed into two areas―agree and disagree, was adopted for the purpose of testing the hypothesis. The “undecided” was also considered not to be in favour of the Likert items.
9. Data Presentation and Analysis
Questionnaires were distributed at the Federal University of Technology, Akure, to 500 respondents. A return rate of 90% was recorded. Valid responses from 450 respondents were used for the purpose of testing the study hypothesis.
From table 1, 153 and 216 respondents strongly agreed and agreed respectively that graphic design theories play an important role in packaging designs. Only 24 of the respondents strongly disagreed, while none disagreed nor was undecided. With a mean of 3.8, which is higher than the computed mean 3.0, it is therefore accepted that most professional graphic designers, from the perspective of the consumers, are guided by graphic design theories in the designing and production of effective packages.
From table 2, 159 and 267 respondents strongly agreed and agreed respectively that graphic design theories play an important role in packaging designs. Only 24 of the respondents strongly disagreed, while none disagreed nor was undecided. With a mean of 4.19, it is therefore accepted that graphic design theories, from the perspective of the consumers, play important roles in packaging design.
From table 3, only 9 and 72 respondents strongly agreed and agreed respectively that packaging can be more appealing without graphic design guides. 15 of the respondents were undecided, while 132 of the respondents disagreed. 222 of the respondents strongly disagreed. With a mean of 1.92, it is therefore rejected that packaging can be more appealing without graphic design theory guides.
From table 4, 186 and 177 respondents strongly agreed and agreed respectively that graphic design theories play an important role in packaging designs. Only 33 of the respondents strongly disagreed, 54 disagreed while none was undecided. With a mean of 3.96, it is therefore accepted that the influence of graphic design in packaging is positive.
From table 1, 111 and 270 respondents strongly agreed and agreed respectively that graphic design theories help to develop upcoming graphic designers. 69 of the respondents strongly disagreed, while none disagreed nor was undecided. With a mean of 3.8, which is higher than the computed mean 3.0, it is therefore accepted that graphic design theories help to develop upcoming designers.
VARIABLE
FREQUENCY
PERCENTAGE 100%
CUMMULATIVE
PERCENTAGE
MEAN
DECISION
STRONGLY DISAGREE
81
18
18
3.8
Accepted
DISAGREE
-
-
18
UNDECIDED
-
-
18
AGREE
216
48
66
STRONGLY AGREE
153
34
100
TOTAL
450
100
100
Table 1. Are most professional graphic designers guided by graphic design theories?
Decision: Accept variable as positively perceived if mean is greater than the computed mean 3.0.
VARIABLE
FREQUENCY
PERCENTAGE 100%
CUMMULATIVE
PERCENTAGE
MEAN
DECISION
STRONGLY DISAGREE
24
5.3
5.3
4.19
Accepted
DISAGREE
-
-
-
UNDECIDED
-
-
-
AGREE
267
59.3
64.6
STRONGLY AGREE
159
35.3
99.9
TOTAL
450
~100
~100
Table 2. Do graphic design theories play important roles in packaging design?
Decision: Accept variable as positively perceived if mean is greater than the computed mean 3.0.
VARIABLE
FREQUENCY
PERCENTAGE
100%
CUMMULATIVE
PERCENTAGE
MEAN
DECISION
STRONGLY DISAGREE
222
49.3
49.3
1.92
Rejected
DISAGREE
132
29.3
78.6
UNDECIDED
15
3.3
81.9
AGREE
72
16.0
97.9
STRONGLY AGREE
9
2.0
99.9
TOTAL
450
~100
~100
Table 3. Packaging can be more appealing without graphic design theory guides.
Decision: Accept variable as positively perceived if mean is greater than the computed mean 3.0.

VARIABLE
FREQUENCY
PERCENTAGE 100%
CUMMULATIVE
PERCENTAGE
MEAN
DECISION
STRONGLY DISAGREE
33
7.3
7.33
3.95
Accepted
DISAGREE
54
12.0
19.3
UNDECIDED
-
-
-
AGREE
177
39.3
58.6
STRONGLY AGREE
186
41.3
99.9
TOTAL
450
~100
~100
Table 4. Is the influence of graphic design in packaging positive?
Decision: Accept variable as positively perceived if mean is greater than the computed mean 3.0.
VARIABLE
FREQUENCY
PERCENTAGE 100%
CUMMULATIVE
PERCENTAGE
MEAN
DECISION
STRONGLY DISAGREE
69
15.3
15.3
3.8
Accepted
DISAGREE
-
-
-
UNDECIDED
-
-
-
AGREE
270
60
60
STRONGLY AGREE
111
24.7
24.7
TOTAL
450
100
100
Table 5. Graphic design theories help to develop upcoming designers.
Decision: Accept variable as positively perceived if mean is greater than the computed mean 3.0.
n
MIN.
MAX.
MEAN
VARIANCE
Typography plays an extremely important role in packaging.
450
1
5
3.75
1.046
Illustrations are very much important in Graphic design theory
450
2
5
4.04
0.683
Colour is the most common and important graphic design theory.
450
3
5
4.23
0.364
Valid N (list wise)
450
Table 6. Descriptive statistics of some selected commonly used Graphic Design Theory/Elements.
Source: Researchers’ work, 2017.
10. Hypothesis Testing
The hypothesis below was tested for the purpose of this study:
Hypothesis:
H0: There is no significant relationship between usage/application of graphic design theories and the creation of attractive graphic/package designs.
H1: There is a significant relationship between usage/application of graphic design theories and the creation of attractive graphic/package designs.
Respondents were made to rate graphic design theories-guided package designs against non-graphic design theories-guided package designs as a means of measuring the influence of graphic design theories-guided product packaging on consumers’ consumption preferences.
From Table 7, since the p-value obtained is 0.000075 which is less than the predetermined significance level (α = 0.01), the result is significant at p < 0.01.
Variable
Observed N
Expected N
Residual
Graphic design theories-guided packaging
267
225
42
Non-graphic design theories-guided packaging
183
225
-42
Total
450
Table 7. Relationship between graphic design theories-guided package designs and non-graphic design theories-guided package designs (with consumption rate/preferences as the parameter).
Rejected at p < 0.01.
Therefore, we reject the null hypothesis and, hence, the alternative hypothesis, which establishes a significant relationship between graphic design theories guided package designs and consumption preferences, is thereby accepted.
11. Discussion
From table 2, with a mean of 4.19, it was concluded that graphic design theories play important roles in packaging design with over 94% of the respondents in agreement. This justifies the findings recorded in table 1, which shows that most professional graphic designers are guided by graphic design theories in the designing and production of effective consumer product packages, with 82% of the respondents in agreement. This indicates that most productive and effective designers are guided by graphic design theories. Deliberately or otherwise, they follow the guidance of established design theories, although they are prone to productive flexibility. This, hence, establishes the influence and importance of graphic design theories in consumer product package designing.
However, it is needful to examine if the influence graphic design theories have on package designs is positive or negative in fulfilling the purposes of the created designs or packages. This was established in table 4. With a mean of 3.96, it was accepted that the influence of graphic design in packaging is positive with over 80% of the respondents in agreement. This further reiterates the significance of graphic design theories in the creation of effective graphic designs. This justifies further the result established in table 3 which showed that package designs cannot be more appealing without graphic design theories. With a mean of 1.92, over 78% of the respondents rejected the notion that package designs can be more appealing without graphic design theory guides.
The result in table 6 shows that colour is more dominant when it comes to applying graphic design theory with the other factors like illustration and typography in product packaging. This effect is, according to Burchett (2002) , due to the fact that colour plays an important role in design. It is a trigger to arouse viewers’ emotions and a carrier that designers use to deliver information.
The study not only established the significance of graphic design theories in the creation of effective consumer product package design technology, it also establishes the fact that graphic design theories help in the building up of upcoming generation of designers as established in table 5. Therefore, not only do graphic design theories positively influence today’s packaging technology but also how it will be applied in the future. The hypothesis proposed and tested established a significant relationship between the usage or application of graphic design theories and the creation of effective and attractive package designs.
12. Conclusion
Although there are several graphic design theory elements used across the world, there, however, are still major elements that are uniform which guide every graphic designers towards achieving a clear and major goal―solving problems. This study, in conclusion, hence established that graphic design theories guide effective consumer product package designers, both in growth and in practice. It also established the significance of design theories in packaging technology, indicating that graphic design theory research has both direct and indirect implications on packaging technology when applied effectively. Without effective graphic design theories application, the efforts of most, if not all, professionals involved in packaging technology will be relatively futile. Hence, packaging systems are more successful when dependent on Graphic Design-theories.



A Collaborative Supply Chain Management System for a Maritime Port Logistics Chain
L.M. Ascencio1, R.G. González-Ramírez*2, L.A. Bearzotti3, N.R. Smith4 and J.F. Camacho-Vallejo5
1Escuela Universitaria de Ingeniería Industrial Informática y de Sistemas Universidad de Tarapacá, Avda. 18 de Septiembre 2222, Arica, Chile
2Escuela de Ingeniería Industrial, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, Av. Brasil 2241, Valparaíso, Chile.
*rosa.gonzalez@ucv.cl
3Escuela de Ingeniería de Transporte, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, Av. Brasil 2241, Valparaíso, Chile.
4Centro de Calidad y Manufactura, ITESM, Campus Monterrey.
Eugenio Garza Sada Sur 2501, Monterrey, Nuevo León, México. CP. 64849.
5 Facultad de Ciencias Físico-Matemáticas, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León,
Av. Universidad s/n., Ciudad Universitaria, San Nicolás de Los Garza, Nuevo León, México
ABSTRACT
In this article we propose a collaborative logistics framework for a Port Logistics Chain (PLC) based on the principles of Supply Chain Management (SCM) that rely on stakeholders integration and collaboration, providing a reference model for the inland coordination of the PLC. A comprehensive literature review was conducted, analyzing several cases in which SCM practices have been implemented as well as studies related to port development, governance, coordination and best practices associated. This background information was used to identify current gaps in logistics management practices and potential scopes of intervention within the PLC to suggest a redesign process and configure new structures under a collaborative scheme, following the guidelines of SCM.
Keywords: Port Logistics Chain, Supply Chain Management, Demand Management, Orders Management, Vehicle Management.
RESUMEN
Entender las disrupciones y su propagación a lo largo de las cadenas de suministro se ha vuelto crítico para el diseño de cadenas de suministro globales operando en economías emergentes. Esto no solo implican pérdidas económicas a cualquier organización involucrada en una cadena de suministro, sino que además disminuye la competitividad logística nacional. Este trabajo provee elementos numéricos de la importancia de la seguridad en América Latina y al mismo tiempo, propone un modelo de evaluación desde la metodología de dinámica de sistemas con base en información real, capaz de establecer escenarios para medir los impactos relacionados de la propagación de interrupciones en la cadena de suministro causados por actos criminales. Finalmente, se presentan conclusiones para el diseño de cadenas de suministro más resilientes, así como propuestas de investigación futura.
1. Introduction
A port logistics chain (PLC) embraces all the global logistics chains that operate through a seaport, including different stakeholders involved in the international trade processes, such as the importers and exporters, the Port Authority, the terminal operators, customs, customs agents, transport companies (ground and maritime), freight forwarders, empty container parks, etc. The PLC faces important challenges for the integration of those supply chains processes and the huge
number of public and private stakeholders. Another challenge faced by the PLC is the existence of several sources of variability that affect the import and export flows.
This could be either from the maritime perspective with variability in the arrival time of ships to the port, or from the inland perspective with uncertainty regarding the exact arrival time of external trucks to the port terminal, as well as444
Vol. 12, June 2014
 service times at each echelon of the logistic chain. These factors strongly impact the resource and capacity utilization of the different stakeholders. Hence, the PLC should focus on the reduction of variability through a better coordination among the physical and documental flows, based on the well- known inter-enterprise concepts of Supply Chain Management (SCM).
Chilean foreign trade has experienced a sustained growth in the last decades, as it can be observed in the reports of international commerce provided by the Chilean Customs and related gremial associations. Due to free trade agreements with several countries and the trade globalization process, this trend is expected to continue in the future. As a consequence, port infrastructure has been improved and increased.
However, after performing in site visits to Chilean Ports and interviews with key stakeholders such as transport operators and stevedore’s managers, those investments in port infrastructure lack of modifications and improvements in logistics processes. Previous issue is also supported by the current position of Chile (or any Latin American country) at international benchmark measures such as the Logistic Performance Index (LPI), in which Chile occupied the first place in LATAM in 2012 report, but the position number 39 with respect to developed economies. Hence, it is clear that there is room for logistics improvements that may enhance the competitiveness of international trade of the nation.
Previous issues and the fact that international trade has significantly increased, has led to high logistics costs, congestion at port facilities, and document based processes prone to mistakes and duplications, among other problems. As a solution to the above problem, we present a proposal for the design and implementation of a collaborative logistics framework as a reference model for the coordination of the inland operations of the PLC. The proposed framework includes three main components:
(1) Management of Port Logistics Governance. This is based on the existence of a Port Community with a well-defined organizational structure that facilitates dialogue and communication among the public and private
stakeholders involved in the port logistics chain, fostering the analysis and continuous improvement of the international trade procedures.
(2)_Port Logistics Operations Model. This considers the relationship between the main infrastructure of the port and the logistics processes associated, which could be centralized, descentralized or hybrid, according to the existence or not of a pre-terminal or a facility that is used as an extension of the port where total or partial flows should be directed;
(3) Logistics Management Platform System. This includes a conceptualization of the planning, scheduling, and control activities cycles of physical and information flows and the technological systems that support them through the entire port logistics chain.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. A literature review on SCM and other studies related to Port Operations and Development is addressed in Section 2. Section 3 presents the proposed framework and its main components and Section 4 provides details related to the Logistics Management Platform System and the subsystems Demand Management System (4.1), Vehicles Management System (4.2) and Order Management System (4.3). Section 5 presents a brief description of the case of a Chilean PLC. Conclusions, managerial insights and further research are provided in section 6.
2. Literature Review
Due to the globalization, e-commerce, and mass customization trends, global logistics management in business operations has become more important than ever. In this regard, transportation is becoming a more strategic business function because transport costs are accounting for a larger percentage of the cost of goods sold [1]. In addition, delays in transit time can undermine enterprise performance, affecting the organization’s competitiveness [2]. Consequently, ports are now seriously exploring the potential of the supply chain management (SCM) concept. Effective SCM is an essential strategy for enterprise success in global and e-markets to get products to market faster and at a minimal total cost[3-5].
A Collaborative Supply Chain Management System for a Maritime Port Logistics Chain, L.M. Ascencio et al. / 444􏰁458
 Journal of Applied Research and Technology
445
 
 A Collaborative Supply Chain Management System for a Maritime Port Logistics Chain, L.M. Ascencio et al. / 444􏰁458
Globalization has introduced additional concerns to companies participating in international supply chains. These include interest rates, exchange rates, taxes, duties, and customs regulations. This environment is continuously changing, and so is the volatility of the freight market [6]. All these issues have contributed to increasing the pressure on port operations, as well as the introduction of structural changes in logistics and new patterns of distribution.
In a broad sense, a supply chain consists of two or more legally separated organizations linked by material, information, and financial flows. These organizations may be firms producing parts, components and end products, logistic service providers, and the customer. SCM recognizes the strategic nature of coordination between trading partners. The higher the degree of integration across the supply chain the better a firm performs [7,8]. There are dangers if suppliers and customers are not fully integrated in terms of their business processes [9].
Currently the competition in the global market does not occur between companies but between supply chains and flexibility is becoming one of the most important requirements of production systems in which the product/service is often produced with contribution of several companies [10]. Going beyond organizational barriers, aligning strategies, and speeding up flows along the supply chain are typical issues in SCM [11]. So the next step is to achieve supply chain collaboration [12]. Simatupang and Sridharan [13] offer as a definition: “A collaborative supply chain simply means that two or more independent companies work jointly to plan and execute supply chain operations with greater success than when acting in isolation”.
When a common action plan is executed by the legally separated firms in a supply chain, they collaborate to improve the competitiveness of the supply chain as a whole [11].
It is generally accepted that a relationship exists between competitiveness and supply chain structure [14-16] and the ability to adapt the structure of the supply chain quickly according to market needs has been recognized as one of the major advantages of this type of organization [11].
This is a very useful ability for a volatile environment like the one associated with seaport clusters [6]. Supply chain performance assessment has been proved to be a key element on the current global environment, and systematic approaches are essential to understand the interactions of the different echelons of the logistics chain [17].
The existence of a huge number of public and private stakeholders that interact in transport operations and the logistics of international trade cargo generates significant coordination problems among the port terminals and their main users, in addition requiring a huge number of transactions and documentation processes, most of them based on paper documents. These characteristics strongly impact the logistics efficiency of the transport industry, the exporter, and the importer, generating congestion at the access point to the terminal as well as long waiting times at the different nodes of the international trade logistics chain.
Traditionally, ports act as an interface between ships and shore by providing shelter and a berthing space, temporary storage, and infrastructure for cargo operations and movement within the port [18,19]. However, the evolution of supply chains urges market players such as maritime shipping lines, stevedoring companies, inland transport operators (freight forwarders and rail and trucking companies), and shipping and customs officers to re-think their role in the logistics process and poses great challenges to the role of ports as functional nodes in logistics networks [20] and to achieving a more active role in supply chains with additional integration levels, which goes beyond their traditional transshipment role [21].
The tendency towards supply chain orientation and logistics integration in the port and maritime industry is well documented in recent literature [22- 27]. In a new trend among port system shippers, third party logistics providers and port authorities need to reconfigure a more competitive port network structure.
Thus, ports need to be oriented towards supply chains to meet the changing needs of their users and customers [28]. It is very common for maritime shipping lines and inland transport firms to consist
 446
Vol. 12, June 2014
 
 of different companies who may attempt to establish long-term business relationships. Some strategies such as joint ventures and network integration through coordination among players have been deployed in order to share logistics information, techniques, and resources to gain bargaining power over suppliers [20]. Based on these principles, this research provides a framework for logistics management and improvement of the inter-enterprise processes that include common areas and resources that should be administrated by several actors.
Tongzon et al. [28] analyzed how much the port sector is supply chain oriented by means of an empirical study, considering the port of Incheon (South Korea) as a case study and measuring the degree of its supply chain orientation. The study considered the perspectives of both the port terminal operator and the shipping line calling at the port. An analysis of the main discrepancies between both perspectives is presented as well as an analysis of the impacts on the performance of the port terminal.
One main finding of their study is the difficulty of achieving integration in the supply chain because of data sharing and the lack of cohesion and trust among the different public and private stakeholders. Another conclusion of the study is that more emphasis should be placed on generating additional value-added services as well as improving the port ́s access to the hinterland in order to improve the attractiveness of the port to its users.
Ascencio et al., [29] performed a study to measure the degree of cohesion among the stakeholders of the port supply chain of the Port of San Antonio, as well as the levels of satisfaction with respect to the service level received. It was observed that those stakeholders with a high frequency of interaction with each other perceived better service levels and manifested greater satisfaction compared to those that maintained lower frequencies of interaction. Low degrees of trust and confidence with respect to the services provided by the port terminal, the empty container depots, and warehouses were observed, as well as low satisfaction levels with respect to the price-quality ratio.
Furthermore, via a number of group sessions with representative stakeholders of the PLC, the main
limitations, opportunity areas, and possible threats to the port system were identified. The main concerns were related to the need for a global entity that enhances the integration and collaboration among the different stakeholders (governance).
Almoratair and Lumsde [30] presented a comprehensive theoretical analysis and conceptual foundation of the port logistics platform as it relates to SCM concepts using a systems theory approach. A port logistics platform is a group of enterprises that work in an environment of close collaboration to strategically position and increase the operational efficiency of each enterprise involved, and in this way achieve competitive advantages in the whole supply chain. Three main systems that constitute the port logistics platform are identified: the port logistics system, the multimodal transport system, and the information and communications system, which are closely interrelated.
The Port Authority has a strategic role, interacting with the stakeholders involved in international trade logistics, such as exporters, importers, logistics operators, customs agents, inland carriers, and shipping lines in order to identify the main factors that impact the logistics performance of the port system [31].
In the research proposed herein, a collaborative framework to improve inter-enterprise processes for a port logistics chain is presented, with the aim to optimize the collaborative operations in the context of international trade and transport interactions, based on the principles of SCM. SCM is “a set of approaches that efficiently integrate suppliers, manufacturers, warehouses and stores for planning, implementing and controlling of the materials and information flows from origin to the point of destination, so that merchandise is produced and distributed at the right quantities, to the right locations, and at the right time, in order to minimize system wide costs while satisfying service level requirements” [32].
Analogously, SCM for a PLC can be defined as follows: “The Management of a Port Logistics Chain promotes the efficient integration and coordination of public and private stakeholders for planning, implementing and controlling the flow of
A Collaborative Supply Chain Management System for a Maritime Port Logistics Chain, L.M. Ascencio et al. / 444􏰁458
 Journal of Applied Research and Technology
447
 
 A Collaborative Supply Chain Management System for a Maritime Port Logistics Chain, L.M. Ascencio et al. / 444􏰁458
maritime and ground transport, cargo and information flow (service orders and documentation of international trade) from origin to the point of destination (hinterland, foreland) in an efficient and effective way, in order to minimize system wide costs while satisfying service level requirements of importers and exporters (agility and predictability)”.
3. Collaborative Logistics Framework Description
To design and implement the proposed collaborative framework, we focused on the study and analysis of the current degree of integration of the inter-enterprise processes of a PLC, focused on the inland side. We analyzed the current practices of the main Chilean ports and their daily operations and contrasted them with respect to best practices in the literature and case studies in which SCM practices have been implemented successfully, such as in the textile retail, automotive, and supermarket industries. This background information was used to identify current gaps in logistics management practices and potential scopes of intervention within a PLC. Once the current business practices of a port and the challenges to logistics management practices were understood, a redesign process was applied to configure new structures under a collaborative scheme, following the guidelines of SCM.
Figure 1 presents a diagram of the proposed framework, which is composed of three elements: (a) Management of Port Logistic Governance, (b) Logistics Management Platform System, and (c) Port Logistics Operations Model.
Figure 1. Collaborative Logistics Framework for a PLC.
The Management of Port Logistics Governance refers to the supra-structure of the PLC, which is based on the existence of a Port Community that facilitates the communication and integration of the different stakeholders of the PLC, including public policy makers based on a well-balanced and integrated stakeholders approach. The Port Community therefore provides a platform for the analysis and continuous improvement of the inter- enterprise processes of the PLC. The port community structure may consider the following strategic pillars: (1) infrastructure, (2) logistics, (3) port-city relationship and environmental issues.
The proposed framework articulates a governance to coordinate the work of multiple stakeholders, both public and private that participate in a collaborative environment. In this regard, issues that should be addressed are: utilization of logistic infrastructure in collaborative schemes, fee regulations, service quality, security (cargo and persons), models of penalties and incentives, and continuous improvement and innovation.
The Logistics Management Platform System, LMPS, serves to design and implement processes and technologies to achieve a more efficient and effective physical and documental flow in the PLC. The main focus is on those business processes that are not related to a single stakeholder and their coordination requires a collaborative approach in order to achieve good performance by the entire PLC. These business processes correspond to three scopes: demand management, vehicle management, and orders management, which can be addressed at a tactical and operational level based on transactional and analytical information systems. More details are provided in section 4.
The third element of the framework, the Port Logistics Operations Model is related to the type of infrastructure and operations model of the port system, which could be either centralized (a two stage system with a pre-terminal and a number of port terminals, in which external trucks are required to arrive at the pre-terminal and then be directed to the corresponding terminal), decentralized (a single stage system in which external trucks arrive directly to the corresponding port terminal) or hybrid (there is a pre-terminal but is not a mandatory stop for all the external
  448
Vol. 12, June 2014
 
 vehicles, some of which arrive directly to the port terminal according to a defined set of business rules). The governance model may consider the role of the port authority that could be based on a landlord scheme.
The proposed framework can be used as a reference model to improve the integral competitiveness of the port and the related stakeholders. The framework also provides support for the processes of redesign and for technological projects such as Single Window Systems and Port Community Systems to facilitate trade and increase efficiency by reducing time and costs.
4. Logistics Management Platform System (LMPS) description.
In this section we present more details on the proposed LMPS. We first introduce in section 4.1 the inter-enterprise processes both individually and their interactions. Then in section 4.2 we present the proposal to manage the inter-enterprise processes based on information technologies, both individually and in a collaborative scheme.
4.1 Inter-Enterprise processes of the PLC
Inter-enterprise processes of the PLC are mainly related to three scopes: demand management, orders management and vehicles management. Decision making related to manage demand and capacity of the PLC can be addressed at tactical and operational levels. Figure 2 summarizes the main focus of the inter-enterprise processes at tactical and operational decision levels, and their interactions.
Figure 2. Scope of the inter-enterprise processes and interactions.
Tactical level decisions rely on anticipation and collaborative planning of shared resources such as gate capacity and ground slot capacity at pre- terminals and terminals, as well as the access
roads, with a medium and short-term horizon, preparing for the most likely scenario to occur, and adjusting the available resources of the port. As observed in figure 2, Demand Port Planning and Vehicle Port Scheduling activities belong to this category. Operational level decisions are focused on the day to day events management (very short- term), such as controlling the entry and exit of vehicles, executing a customs process, or the control of the physical and information flows. Execution and Control Data and Vehicle Flow activities belong to this category.
Figure 3 illustrates the interactions among the different scopes of the inter-enterprise processes, divided into planning, scheduling, and execution and control activities cycles. Consider for instance, the centralized operation model. The emphasis of this model is to improve operations at the pre- terminal and terminals to minimize congestion and long waiting times for the external trucks, as well as improve the efficiency on the resource utilization of each facility.
Figure 3. Collaborative Activities Cycles of the PLC.
As observed in figure 3, tactical decisions allow estimating demand and operations planning and scheduling for the corresponding ships to be served during a planning horizon. For each service a stacking window prior to the estimated arrival time of the ship is opened to receive export containers.
Hence estimations of workload flows are based on forecasts, which become real data as long as the arrival time of the ship is closer.
A Collaborative Supply Chain Management System for a Maritime Port Logistics Chain, L.M. Ascencio et al. / 444􏰁458
   Journal of Applied Research and Technology
449
 
 A Collaborative Supply Chain Management System for a Maritime Port Logistics Chain, L.M. Ascencio et al. / 444􏰁458
Based on that, operational level decisions related to the execution and control plans for orders and vehicle flows are performed and updated trough the planning horizon which creates interactions between tactical and operational cycles. The added value proposal is associated to the tactical activities at the pre-terminal which is the main source of congestion due to the lack of collaborative planning between the end users of the port (exporters/importers and the port terminals).
For each scope of the LMPS, there exists technological solutions to support decisions which could be either transactional or analytical systems. Analytical systems use heuristic and optimization models to analyze particular elements of the business and to support the decision-making processes, considering different types of constraints, costs, and its real structure, working with aggregated information (Demand Management System and Vehicle Management System). Transactional systems capture, store, and communicate basic data related to material and information flows, such as a customs authorizations, forwarding requests, etc. (Orders Management System and Vehicle Management System).
It is also important to highlight the interactions that exist among the different processes. Tactical decisions are closely interrelated because they are based on the demand that is estimated for a planning horizon. There will be some operations required to be executed in order to fulfill that demand, which should be planned and scheduled. On the other hand, at the operational level, those plans and schedules should be executed.
Systems to control information and physical flows are closely interrelated because the order management system must indicate to each vehicle when to move to the next stage and thus control the service times.
4.2 Technological Platform for the LMPS
The LMPS proposed as part of the framework includes a number of analytical (tactical) and transactional (operational) technologies. The objective of the analytical and transactional technologies is the collaborative management of common resources such as ground slots at pre- terminals and terminals, gate capacity, and
aggregated information on workloads over a planning horizon. The intent of this is to increase the productivity and efficiency of the individual stakeholders of the PLC and the performance of the entire PLC. A transversal characteristic of the proposed technological tools is their integrative scheme based on the planning, scheduling and control of activities cycles, as was highlighted in section 4.1.
4.2.1 Demand Management System (DMS)
Activities related to demand management processes are mainly focused on the phases of forecasting and generation of useful information (expected workload). Managers of the terminal use this information for resource planning and short and medium-term scheduling (equipment, space, and human resources). Customs and customs agents use this information to anticipate workloads and to assign personnel to the different functions related to clearance processes. Coordination activities among all the stakeholders involved in the PLC allow improvement of the decision making process for their own resources and for the whole system.
Apart from the provision of basic infrastructure for the transfer of goods between sea and land, multiple services are provided by different agents at ports, such as cargo handling services including cargo consolidation, dispatching and reception of cargo, customs clearance, cargo warehousing, etc. Hence, the PLC must enhance the way information is handled to improve the coordination of terminals and task scheduling. For this, a standardization of the needed data and a collaborative technological platform that integrates the different activities within the PLC should be implemented.
The DMS proposed supports scenario analysis for planning and scheduling of resources in common areas, through the generation of medium and short-term demand forecasts with respect to service capacity. The DMS provides business intelligence to evaluate workload content for task scheduling scenarios and capacity analysis. It also helps to provide terminal managers and other stakeholders involved in the process of coordination with access to standardized information related to task scheduling.
 450
Vol. 12, June 2014
 
 A Collaborative Supply Chain Management System for a Maritime Port Logistics Chain, L.M. Ascencio et al. / 444􏰁458
 Figure 4 presents a graphical representation of the different business processes supported by the DMS by means of three subsystems: weekly planning of common areas, task scheduling for a three shifts horizon, and scheduling of common areas.
The figure also illustrates the process for coordinating tasks in the terminal and the assignment of resources for customs activities.
Customs inspections (as well as quarantine or other type of inspections) could be performed either at the pre-terminal (for a centralized model), at each terminal or at an independent facility (for the descentralized model) and there should be good coordination with the terminals in order to efficiently segregate those containers requiring inspections and provide good estimations of workload requirements for those inspections.
Figure 4. Main business processes involved in the DMS.
4.2.2 Order Management System (OMS)
The OMS aims to organize and coordinate the execution and control of physical and information flows at the port system and constitutes a tool that manages the exchange of information among stakeholders so as to enable anticipated requests or procedures to expedite the physical flow of cargo at the port.
This facilitates the monitoring of activities of the diverse firms at the pre-terminal and terminals, as illustrated in figure 5.
Figure 5. Order Management System as part of the LMPS.
As observed in figure 5, order management is directly associated to the Control Cycle, dealing with on real time information that updates tactical plans, based on the real workload face by the terminal in terms of order requests and vehicle flows at either the pre-terminal and terminals.
The main problems found in PLCs are long waiting times for documentation requirements and procedures, and a lack of integrated information management as a philosophy. Hence, the solution proposed is focused on displaying and integrating information, reducing paper based documents and duplication of information. The OMS defines a conceptual framework to manage the existing orders at the PLC so that export and import flows may be optimized.
The proposed OMS is based on the principles of independence of the physical flows (cargo and vehicle) with the documentation, anticipated customs and port procedures (so as to reduce clearance procedures), standardization and integration of documents, and the incorporation of an electronic platform for authorization procedures that can connect the multiple systems operated by the different stakeholders prior to the arrival to the port.
This solution is a first step for the implementation of a single port window, known as a Port Community System (PCS) that has been implemented in several well developed ports (Port of Singapure, Rotterdam, Valencia, Barcelona, etc.).
  Journal of Applied Research and Technology
451
 
 A Collaborative Supply Chain Management System for a Maritime Port Logistics Chain, L.M. Ascencio et al. / 444􏰁458
We propose the implementation of a single and standard document referred to as the Single Electronic Coordination Document (SECD), that includes customs and port information that is needed for the free flow of the truck and cargo once it arrives to the port. The SECD is a fundamental element for the integration of data among the various stakeholders and seeks to minimize the use of paper documents and double typing of data. It also allows visualizing the physical and documental status of the external and internal customers of the port.
The solution should provide information of anticipated documental procedures prior to the arrival of external trucks to the port and also display the status of the orders at the port, so that the stakeholders involved may have information for decision making and execution control. This could be part of a track and trace system of the port that allows visibility of the cargo for the different stakeholders of the port logistics chain.
4.2.3 Vehicle Management System (VMS)
The VMS should be conceptualized as a support system for coordinating the vehicles at the port and managing vehicle orders. There are two main vehicle flows to coordinate: (a) vehicle flows from and to the hinterland to the port terminal (full containers) and vehicle flows from and to empty container parks; (b) internal vehicle flows and cargo flows within the port. For the first vehicle flow (a), solutions related to Vehicle Booking Systems (VBS) should be implemented, so as to control and reduce congestion and provide more efficient resource capacity utilization of the port terminals, as well as better service standard levels to the external trucks in terms of truck turnaround times.
Management of traffic flow within the port (b) is a shared task among operators and port coordinators (such as the Port Authority) and their efficiency and productivity are critical factors for the customers in terms of service times and associated costs. Tasks at the terminal are of two general types: receiving export cargo and dispatching import cargo. Cargo can be received and dispatched either containerized or as breakbulk cargo. Consolidating and unconsolidating cargo activities could be performed at the port terminals at the Cargo
Freight Station area, and corresponds to another type of tasks.
Vehicle flows for the different tasks within the port system should be controlled and monitored so as to avoid congestion and reduce service times. Depending on the complexity of the export and import cycles, there will be different arrival sequences of trucks to the port system, either concentrated at peak periods or previously coordinated with the customer based on booking and appointment systems. The complexity of vehicle coordination is exacerbated when in short periods of time, the arrival of a large number of vehicles for different export and import tasks occurs.
Accordingly, three main principles were considered for the proposed VMS:
• Synchronization between tasks and coordination of the vehicle flow. Tasks should be coordinated among operators and coordinators of the vehicle flows, such that workloads in the different stages of the vehicular circuit are balanced based on specific business rules, both centralized and decentralized according to the logistics operations model of the port. For this, the VMS should support the administration truck flows between the pre-terminal and terminals, authorizations, notifications, and traffic control, and support the physical and documental traceability of trucks.
• Simultaneity of requirements. Along the time horizon, there will be simultaneous and concurrent requirements. Therefore, a synchronized dispatching of vehicles as a function of the different active tasks at the port is required. Each active task has its own requirement of trucks to execute the corresponding activities, and hence, business rules should be defined to manage vehicle flows within the system.
• Visibility of relevant information for vehicle management. Coordinating the work of the various stakeholders within the port requires information on the status of trucks and cargo, the state of the active tasks, the container slot utilization, and the status of requests for the dispatching of trucks to each active task.
Coordination of tasks and orders is based on the utilization of container slots in the port. Along with
 452
Vol. 12, June 2014
 
 the visualization of the physical state of the truck, it is necessary to control the utilization level of slots at both the pre-terminal and terminals, which allows coordinating the reception of vehicles that are waiting in previous stages to be serviced. Figure 6 present the cycles in which the VMS provides support, which are related to the execution and control of the arrivals and dispatching of vehicles. These activities involve intensive use of resources in common areas (pre- terminal) and terminal areas, which is an important factor regarding the main problems associated to congestion and delays at the port.
5._Case Study of an application of the Collaborative Framework for a Chilean port logisticschain.
We consider a Chilean Port Logistics Chain that operates in the Central Region of Chile. According to the proposed framework, we present a description of each of the three elements for the port system considered. International trade operations in Chile are highly dynamic, evidence of the current integration with world markets. Maritime transport is the most significant mode in Chile, with more than 90% of the cargo transferred through maritime port terminals.
The central region of Chile concentrates more than 60% of the volume transferred within the country and two main Container Ports provide public service. Both are the closest ports to the capital of the country, Santiago (within 100 kilometers), and share the same hinterland. The efficiency of the PLC is a fundamental competitive element.
Management of Port Logistics Governance
In terms of the Management of Port Logistics Governance, a Port Community was established several years ago in which the different stakeholders are gathered, acting as a platform for communication and collaborative analysis of the current processes and continuous improvement opportunities. The Port Community has participated in the process of port modernization both in terms of infrastructure and technology. The Port Community is structured into three committees: the strategic committee, the forum, and the operational committee and operates with work-tables that meet under a defined schedule.
Port Logistics Operations Model
The PLC considered is currently operating under a centralized logistics model with two port terminals and a common pre-terminal (a two stage port system). The Port Authority operates under a landlord scheme, where the two terminals are each operated by a private terminal operator, but one of them recently given in concession (early of 2013) and previously operated by the Port Authority under a multi-operator model. The physical configuration of this port system is common to
A Collaborative Supply Chain Management System for a Maritime Port Logistics Chain, L.M. Ascencio et al. / 444􏰁458
 Figure 6. Vehicles Management as part of the LMPS.
The proposed VMS is presented in figure 7. The VMS architecture consists of two layers. At a tactical level, the parameters for the operations and resource planning and scheduling are set (based on a simulation model) that in turns, will be an input for the operational level in which traffic within the port will be coordinated and controlled.
 Figure 7. Vehicles Management System Architecture.
 Journal of Applied Research and Technology
453
 
 A Collaborative Supply Chain Management System for a Maritime Port Logistics Chain, L.M. Ascencio et al. / 444􏰁458
 several Chilean ports due to the lack of space at the terminals.
Some advantages that a centralized logistics model has brought to this port are: integration with access routes, displacement of truck congestion from the terminals to the pre-terminal, reduction of congestion in the city surrounding the port, as well as a reduction of cargo dwell times at the terminal yards, which have very limited storage space.
Logistics Management Platform System
The proposed system integrates three interrelated business cycles: the port planning cycle, with a planning horizon of a maximum of a week or 21 shifts, each of 8 hours; the resource scheduling cycle, with a time horizon of 2 days, the execution and control cycle, in which the focus is on the management of service orders and the control of the vehicles, cargo, and the associated documentation.
a) Demand Management System
Anticipated information related to the workload content of the different areas of the port, considering the pre-terminal, terminals, and the active and prospective tasks within a planning horizon is required.
Hence a demand management system is proposed with the aim to forecasting demand on a determined planning horizon.
The DMS considered two types of forecast models to estimate workload content: static and dynamic (see figure 8).
The static forecast model works with a planning horizon of one week and provides aggregated information on workload content for the PLC in terms of the currently active and prospective tasks to be executed.
The dynamic forecast model estimates workload content for active tasks at the port for the next shift. Both forecasts models should be updated and can be related also to a Truck Appointment System.
Static Forecast Model Dynamic Forecast Model
Figure 8. Demand Management System Architecture.
b) Order Management System
In order to implement the OMS, we consider the direct dispatching of import container flows, incorporating the functionalities of anticipated procedures, the integration of information in a single document (SECD), and traceability.
The OMS incorporates the required orchestration to control and execute activities within the PLC, integrated with the VMS that will be described below. Figure 9 presents an example of the relationship between the OMS and the related activities for this flow, as well as the systems of the stakeholders involved.
c) Vehicle Management System
The port system under consideration lacks of coordination with its hinterland and road access to the gate of the terminal. This impacts the service variables such as the vehicle times in system, asset opportunity costs, and service quality.
Synchronizing coordination and operations is hampered by a lack of standardization in procedures, a lack of accountability in the use of common areas for parking, inefficiencies in the operation of tasks, a lack of technological support, and paper based documental procedures.
The proposal for the VMS is based on a Kanban system that relies on the principles of the Just in Time philosophy [33], in which execution and control activities are based on a pull system.
Ship Planning
 Ships to arrive during the week
  Demand Forecast Model for Operations Planning
Forecast for workload content
  Planning Tasks
Cargo that will arrive for each active task
  Logistics Information
Per Ship
PerTask
Per each day of the week
  Cargo that will arrive for each planning task
  Forecast for workload content
  Task Scheduling
Demand Forecast Model for Operations Scheduling
  Per Day Per Shift PerTask
  Task that will produced during the day.
 454
Vol. 12, June 2014
 
 A Collaborative Supply Chain Management System for a Maritime Port Logistics Chain, L.M. Ascencio et al. / 444􏰁458
 Figure 9. Orchestration of the direct dispatching of import containers flows within the OMS.
 Thus, the last stage of the process activates the material requirements or flows for earlier stages, achieving production in the right amount and at the precise moment that it is needed. In this case, requirement flows consist of the external trucks that arrive to the pre-terminal and wait until the corresponding terminal requests them to deliver or pick up a container.
Monitoring activities should provide basic control information, both for the trucks and for the status of the pre-terminal and terminals, allowing an efficient synchronization of vehicles in the different stages of the process.
In order to estimate the operational parameters, a simulation model was implemented, modeling the port system as a queuing network with two stages (see figure 10), with pre-stacking and stacking zones.
A common area for parking slots in the pre- terminal and an assigned area for parking slots in the pre-stacking and stacking areas are considered in the system, as well as a buffer area of parking slots that is used for vehicles waiting to be served.
Figure 10. General Structure of the Simulated System.
The simulation model evaluates different parking space configurations with respect to the number of slots in the terminal, in the pre-stacking area, and in the buffer area. The performance indicators utilized were the average waiting times for the vehicles in the port system and the utilization of space.
Given that the main congestion problems arise at the fruit season (January to April), we consider a sampling of truck arrivals during that period and
 Journal of Applied Research and Technology
455
 
 A Collaborative Supply Chain Management System for a Maritime Port Logistics Chain, L.M. Ascencio et al. / 444􏰁458
analyzed only the fruit logistic chain. Based on data published by the port authority, service times for external trucks at peak periods are about 8.58 hours on average in 2009 (Port Authority of Valparaiso, 2010). This considers only when the truck enters to the pre-terminal, waits for the service at the terminal (which includes a service times of 2 hours and 42 minutes on average) and departs. Hence, waiting times at the pre-terminal could be about 6 hours. This could be due to external and internal factors and the objective is to understand the internal factors that could reduce waiting times.
The simulation model considered 73 tasks during which 17,317 trucks arrive to the system, from which 53 tasks corresponded to the main container terminal and 20 to the second terminal previously operated by the Port Authority. Considering the same service times at the terminals, simulation results show a reduction of about 1 hour of waiting times at the pre-terminal on average, which resulted in 17,000 truck-hours reduction per month.
Further improvements can be achieved if the vehicle management system includes a Truck Appointment System so that trucks provide anticipated arrival information to the port and the port terminal managers perform tactical capacity planning and better resource utilization to increase standard service levels to the users.
6. Conclusiones and Recommendations for further research
A Collaborative Logistics Framework for a port logistics chain is presented based on the application of SCM principles that rely on an integral improvement of the multi-enterprise operations, based on the integration of the business processes of the PLC with its stakeholders. This new approach aims to provide a reference model for the coordination of the PLC in terms of infrastructure, common resources, and the information that supports collaborative decisions making.
The proposed collaborative framework comprises three main dimensions: the Management of Port Logistic Governance, (b) the Logistics Management Platform System (LPMS) and (c) the
Port Logistics Operations Model. The framework is focused on the design and implementation of the three inter-enterprise business processes of the PLC: demand management, orders management, and vehicles management. These collaborative processes are developed at a tactical (planning and scheduling) and operational (control and execution) levels. The global objective of these inter-enterprise processes is the coordination of common resources and the reduction of operational variability.
The LMPS is implemented based on three collaborative information systems: the demand management system, the orders management system, and the vehicle management system. These systems allow the administration of the cycles of planning and scheduling of common resources of the PLC, and the control and execution cycles for those operations required for the import and export flows at the PLC.
The proposed framework has been validated with respect to a real PLC in Chile. The Management of Port Logistics Governance is based on the existence of a Port Community that provides a platform for coordination and continuous improvement of the inter-enterprise processes, facilitating the physical and information flow among the private and public stakeholders that are involved in international trade processes.
A key principle considered in the framework is the anticipation of information related to workload cargo in order to support the synchronization of activities among stakeholders involved and the demand flows, as well as to support decision making related to the assignment of resources. Furthermore, it is fundamental to improve coordination between the CLP and the hinterland in terms of implementing a Vehicle Booking Systems (VBS) that may enhance better resource utilization at the terminal and the minimization of truck turnaround times. VBS may also potentially impact the transport chain by providing information that allows the generation of round trips at the port and street-turn opportunities at the hinterland (match empty equipment needs so they can interchange empty containers without first returning them to an empty container park), which in turn, minimizes empty trips and congestion at the PLC.
 456
Vol. 12, June 2014
 
For further research we propose to analyze the impacts of a Truck Appointment System for improving vehicle and information flows at the port, such that service times at the port system may be reduced and external trucks may be able to increase their productivity. Roundtrips or “double appointments “ at the port terminals could be also explored (i.e. a truck delivering an export container and picking up an import container).
Also, as further research, the impacts on resource utilization and efficiency of internal operations based on a Truck Appointment System along with the proposed collaborative framework could be analyzed. The VMS proposed could be also implemented for a descentralized logistics operation model in order to analyze impacts in terms of congestion and pollution at the access of the port with the corresponding adjustments for this type of system.
Acknowledgements
This research has been performed within the scope of the Project FIC-P59 “Improvement of competitiveness standards of the logistics service network of Arica and Parinacota” of the Industrial Engineering Area, sponsored by the Regional Government of Arica and Parinacota.



ence on risks is means that enterprise would choice the risk which they are
willing to take or set action to deal with. It is highly associated with enterprise’s
capability and its business strategy. There is no standard taxonomy, for example,
when an economic recession happen.


