Trails with a gastronomic theme present a popular tool for regional tourism development as they
market destinations/products/experiences in a gastronomy-scape or touristic terroir. They
represent networks or clusters of attractions/destinations unified under a distinct gastronomic
theme such as beer, wine, or cheese.
Most research addressing gastronomic trails has centered on either understanding supplier
networks or understanding the culinary tourist. However, there is lack of research conceptualizing
gastronomic trails as a socio-material context of value co-creation, emphasizing the involvement
of multiple actors and material resources in creating the themed experience for the traveller. This
leads to problems defining the value of themed routes for the businesses as well as the tourist. This
chapter reviews literature to conceptualize the gastronomic trail as a service ecosystem, resulting
in consideration of relevant actors, resources and institutional arrangements in creating the themed
trail experience.
The ecosystem perspective establishes value co-creation dynamics and acknowledges the interplay
of different peripheral actors such as marketers, government and social influencers that form part
of the service ecosystem. The suggested conceptualization of a gastronomic trail informs
theoretical research and experiential marketing practice to enhance value for the focal actors within
the service ecosystem.
Keywords – Gastronomy, Service Ecosystem, Food and Wine Trails, Value Co-creation, Themed
Trails, Wine Route
Cite as: Roy, N., Gretzel, U., Waitt, G., & Yanamandram, V. (2019). GASTRONOMIC TRAILS AS
SERVICE ECOSYSTEMS. In Saurabh Kumar Dixit (Ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Gastronomic
Tourism. New York: Routledge.
Introduction
Gastronomic trails are a growing phenomenon in the context of gastronomic tourism. Gastronomic
trails provide guidance for exploring foodscapes (Hall and Gössling 2016) or culinary terroirs
(Croce and Perri 2010) and are therefore considered effective means for enhancing tourist
experiences. With the growth in understandings of gastronomic tourism, trails have also been used
as an important tourism development tool (Plummer et al. 2005; Bruwer 2003; Boyne et al. 2002).
These trails are typically themed around different types of food or beverages. Examples of such
trails include Craft Beer Trails, Wine Trails, Chocolate Routes or Cheese Trails.
Gastronomic trails are conceptualized as either itinerary products (Mason and O’Mahony 2007) or
networks of regional producers (Brás et al. 2010). Hence, research addressing gastronomic trails
has centered on either understanding the involved supplier networks from a management
perspective (Hall et al. 2005; Broadway 2017; Prat Forga and Cànoves Valiente 2012; Brás et al.
2010) or understanding the gastronomic tourist (Peter and Hannele, 2014; Mason and O'Mahony,
2007). As the sustainability and longevity of the gastronomic trail depends on the involvement
and value creation by and for multiple stakeholders including the producers, regional associations,
tourism authorities as well as the tourists, these trails should be conceptualized from a service
ecosystem perspective. Consequently, this chapter reviews literature to conceptualize gastronomic
trails from a service dominant logic perspective (Vargo and Lusch 2004) that allows to portray
these trails as a dynamic service ecosystem (Vargo and Lusch 2012), which results in
considerations of relevant actors or stakeholders and tourists, resources that actors use to create
value and institutional arrangements that guide them.
This ecosystem perspective forwarded by the service dominant logic (Vargo and Lusch 2006)
establishes the interplay of different actors that form part of the value co-creation processes on
gastronomic trails. The suggested conceptualization of a gastronomic trail not only informs
theoretical research but also experience marketing practice and provides direction to enhance value
for the gastronomic tourist.
Gastronomic Trails
Gastronomic tourism is linked to concepts of local, rural, tradition and history, most often implying
a geographic focus in its conceptualization (Getz and Brown 2006). Croce and Perri (2010) discuss
the importance of ‘terroir’ which encapsulates milieu (common heritage and collective identity),
environment and the landscape. The terroir provides a setting for tourists to interpret and perform
leisure activities. The geographic proximity of various food and beverage producers induces both
production based tourism as well as consumption based tourism (Boyne et al. 2002) whereby
tourists enjoy participating or witnessing gastronomic activities along with consuming these
products. For the tourist, exploring these food and beverage producing regions allows them to visit
several suppliers, savoring a greater diversity of foods/beverages than during a regular touristic
experience. Local producer networks or destination marketing bodies can capitalize on the
geographical proximity of different agro-alimentary producers along with the tourists’ interests in
exploring the ‘terroir’ through the design of trails that guide tourists’ agronomic, physical, social
and cultural understanding of the terroir and movement within it.
Food producers and marketers can align themselves geographically as well as economically and
form regional networks by producing a trail. Gastronomic trails are conceptualized as suppliers
working together to divide marketing costs, share knowledge and achieve economies of
aggregation (Mason and O'Mahony 2007; Broadway 2017). Their collaboration usually culminates
in the formation of an association. Apart from maintaining relationships through collaboration
events and programs and representing the suppliers vis-à-vis the government, the task of an
association is also co-marketing (Hall and Gössling 2016). The association representing the trail
and its businesses creates a single marketing strategy for all the member producers in the local
geographic region and collects resources towards the collateral required (Bruwer 2003; Brás et al.
2010; Plummer et al. 2005). To be able to promote the various businesses under one umbrella, a
theme is selected that helps consumers make sense of the diverse offerings. A specific themed trail
is hence envisaged as a strategy for co-marketing various member producers in a specific
geographic region. The common theme is used for all promotional efforts; for instance, collateral
branded with the theme, such as maps and brochures for the trail, is circulated through visitor
information centre as well as by the producers themselves (Broadway 2017; Hojman and Hunter-
Jones 2012).
Mason and O'Mahony (2007) suggest that food and wine trails are more likely to succeed if they
offer a meaningful experience to the culinary tourist. Most tourists are looking for food and
beverage experiences to form a connection with regional produce, history and country living
(Croce and Perri 2010). Themes can provide the necessary structure and inspiration to make their
regional experiences meaningful (Pine and Gilmore 1998). Hence, for the gastronomic tourist,
trails are conceived as gastronomic experiences built around a theme that requires them to travel
on a particular touring route pertaining to a particular region. This themed movement (MacLeod
2016; Timothy and Boyd 2014) is an important part of how gastronomic experiencesare
appropriated within a particular region. The interpretation and imagination triggered by the theme
as well as the geography of the route helps tourists decide which producers to visit and which
direction to take, ultimately influencing the quality of their experience.
According to existing literature, the gastronomic trail is a valuable marketing strategy in two ways.
First, it is an important marketing tool connecting the different stakeholders/suppliers/actors,
leading to marketing efficiencies. Various studies on wine tourism (Brás et al. 2010; Xu et al.
2016b) and food trails (Broadway 2017) align with the idea that trails allow suppliers to come
together and engage in co-marketing. Second, trail marketing is a way of ordering or structuring a
thematic narrative through which touristscan meaningfully interact with space (MacLeod 2016).
The gastronomic trail enables tourists to form a connection with the theme of gastronomy by
exposing them to the ‘terroir’, sights, sounds and smells that instigate imaginaries and
interpretations of the theme (Mason and O'Mahony 2007; Croce and Perri 2010). Further, trail
marketing connects geography and landscape with the gastronomic theme. Figure 20.1 further
illustrates this conceptualization of the gastronomic trail as a marketing tool that forges
connections between the theme, space and actor.
Figure 20.1 Conceptualization of a Gastronomic Trail
‘Actors’ describes all actors including suppliers, tourists and other stakeholders involved in
creating or appropriating the trail. ‘Theme’ implies the gastronomy-related topic selected to unite
the producers and inspire the consumers and is reflected in all aspects of the trail marketing
strategy. ‘Space’ implies the terroir of the gastronomic region including its agronomic, physical,
social and cultural characteristics. The gastronomic trail hence can be conceptualized as interplay
of actors, theme and space. Previous conceptualizations of gastronomic trails have concentrated
on either individual elements or single connections and have not explained the interdependence of
these elements. Studies have either explored the actor-theme connection, such as how tourists
perceive the theme of gastronomy (Mason and O'Mahony 2007, López-Guzmán et al. 2014), the
actor-actor connection, involved in creating the gastronomic trail such as supplier networks and
supply chains (Broadway 2017; Hojman and Hunter-Jones 2012; Brás et al. 2010; Anderson and
Law 2012) or the actor-space connection through exploration of geographic aspects that define the
development of wine routes (Xu et al., 2016b). As each of these connections is important to
understanding the workability and future sustainability of the gastronomic trail, it is pertinent to
use a framework that studies these elements simultaneously as a systemic whole that reflects
interrelationships as well as reciprocation. Hence, the gastronomic trail is conceptualized as a
dynamic service ecosystem as forwarded by Vargo and Lusch (2006), a concept that is further
explained in the next sections.
The Service Ecosystem
A service ecosystems perspective views a service system as a network of actors that co-create
value with each other using resources during activities and interactions, which is also described as
the process of resource integration (Lusch and Vargo 2014). This approach further emphasizes that
the dynamism of the service ecosystem comes from institutions or ‘rules of the game’ composed
of human actions and interactions that are continuously changing (Giddens 1984). Institutions or
institutional logics are described as socially constructed norms, rules, beliefs and assumptions by
which individuals structure their activities and that influence resource integration practice
(Friedland and Alford 1991).
Such a systemic ‘ecosystem’ perspective facilitates the study of gastronomic trails as firstly, it
moves away from the dyadic relationship between the producer and consumer and recognizes the
involvement of multiple actors in the value creation process. This conceptualization helps in
understanding actor-actor relationships and their impact on value co-creation (Sergio et al. 2017).
Secondly, it recognizes the role of institutional context as a factor influencing value co-creation.
In case of the gastronomic trail the institutional context can be studied as not only the socio-cultural
context of actors but also ‘rules of the game’ or the understandings of activities and interactions
that connect the actors to the theme and space. Hence, the eco-system perspective also helps in
grasping the impacts of space and of the actor-theme-space interplay that happens in the context
of a gastronomic trail.
Conceptualizing Gastronomic Trails as a Service Ecosystem
Actors
Actors are recognized as all social and economic players that are involved in the system exchange
processes (Vargo and Lusch 2011). It brings into view not only focal actors (the firm and the
beneficiary, producer and consumer) but also the context – networks of resources and resource
providing actors (suppliers, industry associations, customer communities, friends and family). In
case of the gastronomic trails, there would be seven types of actors. First, the producers or actors
that are involved in the food and beverage production supply chain. For example the producers on
a wine trail would include the vineyard owners, fermenter, and production machinery owners,
wine-branding and bottling companies, grape pickers and crushers and the cellar door personnel.
Second would be the infrastructure providers or institutions and organizations which regulate or
provide infrastructure for the movement along the trail. For example, the local councils, the state
government and land agencies which decide land sizes, road hierarchies, speed limits, cycle-ways
etc.
The third type of actors would be the intermediaries or connectors that support trail tourism such
as tour operators, bus operators, limousine hire, cycle-hire companies, tour guides, horse-riding
companies, online travel agents etc. These intermediaries are service providers that help in literally
bringing tourists to the wineries. A fourth category of actors would be the influencers or people
who influence the decision of tourists to get on to the trail such as the marketers or visitor
information centre, tourism organizations, wine magazine companies, family members through
word of mouth etc. The fifth category of actors would involve peripheral or associated actors which
work alongside other actors such as accommodation owners, restaurants, other related businesses
such as antique shops, art galleries etc. These actors benefit from people travelling on the wine
trail by providing them with associated services. Sixth, tourists are also considered actors and
classify as consumers in the process of value co-creation as they use resources such as previous
knowledge, skills of interpretation and their own possessions such as the vehicle, camera, sun
glasses etc. to appropriate the themed route. They can be further classified as those that belong to
the immediate travel party and therefore likely share resources and those who are encountered
along the trail. Last, another group of actors that has been discussed in detail recently is the
residents (Xu et al. 2016a). These actors may or may not be relevant for certain gastronomic trails
depending on their proximity and claim to the terroir. A further differentiation can be made
between residents who stay permanently in the area such as farmers etc. and temporary residents
such as tourists who stay for longer durations, or wine-makers who might come to the region only
at the time of harvest. The chart below displays these seven types of actors involved in the process
of value creation on a gastronomic trail.
Figure 20. 2 Types of Actors
Resources
Resources are described as anything (tangible or intangible) that can be drawn on for support by
an actor during activities or interactions. Arnould et al. (2006) describe operand and operant
resources that are used by the consumer. Where operand resources are tangible resources that
require another actor or resource to act upon them to create value (such as goods, materials),
operant resources are by themselves capable of creating value and involve resources such as
knowledge, imagination, skills etc. This conceptualization is problematic as it does not consider
the agency of materials and spaces in molding the experience. We argue to entertain and recognize
material agency as discussed in reference to tourist movement, space (Haldrup and Larsen 2006;
Ponting and McDonald 2013), and material objects (Epp and Price 2010). In context of the
gastronomic trail the thematic materials as well as spatial elements such as the road, landscape and
location are conceptualized to be capable of exerting agency over actors. For instance, the location
of wineries or vineyards influences tourist movement on the trail. Also, tourists do tend to
surrender agency to the road and let the views, landscape or signage take them to their next stop.
Hence materials and space need to be considered as resources that can exert agency; a distinction
between operand and operant resources is therefore counterproductive. Figure 20.3 provides
examples of different categories of resources relevant in the gastronomic trail context.
Figure 20.3 Types of Resources
Resources include materials, space, socio-cultural resources and personal resources of actors.
Different actors utilize multiple resources during resource integration. In the case of a gastronomic
trail, where the tourists need to decide which route to take / producer to go to, they may simply
follow the map (material resource), go along the road to see what they find next (physical
resource), use social resources in the form of word of mouth/ suggestions of influencers (friends,
family, marketers), rely on personal resources (e.g. product knowledge), or use any combination
of these resources.
Resource Integration
The service ecosystems perspective posits all actors as resource-integrators who are guided by the
institutional understandings of their context (Edvardsson et al. 2011). Hence, it is assumed that
resource integration involves actors’ understandings of the social, cultural and material rules or
structures that are embedded in the usage of these resources. Vargo and Lusch (2012; 2016)
suggest using a practice-based approach to analyze resource integration as these notions of
meanings, rules and symbolic values associated with interactions and activities are integrated into
social practice. A practice approach recognizes activities and interactions as part of a larger
integrative social practice based on understandings, procedures and shared meanings (Warde 2005;
Schatzki 1996). The practice approach also lays emphasis on material arrangements that influence
practices (Schatzki 2016), which is of particular relevance in the case of gastronomic trails.
Applying the practice based approach to the gastronomic trail, both consumption and marketing
practices need to be considered (Kjellberg and Helgesson 2006). Hence, resource integration on a
gastronomic trail can be discussed as involving five types of integrative practices (Schatzki 1996;
Warde 2005): ‘Theme-oriented’ cultural consumption practices, ‘journeying/movement’ practices,
‘collaboration’ practices, and ‘exchange’ practices, as further described in Figure 20.4. Where
theme-oriented practices consider the social, cultural and material associations linked with the
gastronomic theme for the consumer, the movement practices define the terroir focused activities
that all actors indulge in. These movement activities are defined by the normative structures of
physical geography. The collaboration practices encompass activities and interactions associated
with networking amongst organizations as well as referencing practices which are aimed at
controlling business within the trail region. Exchange practices denote the activities involved not
only in economic transactions such as purchase of goods and service but also social exchanges
such as small talk with service personnel.
Figure 20.4 Resource Integration Practices
Institutional Logics
Vargo and Lusch (2017) prioritize institutional logics as a structuring agent, which frames the
dynamic service ecosystem. Friedland and Alford (1991) describe institutional logics as socially
constructed, historical patterns of cultural symbols and material practices including assumptions,
values and beliefs by which individuals and organizations provide meaning to their daily activity,
organize time and reproduce their lives and experiences. In other words, the dynamic social and
cultural understandings of actors, structures, influences and guides resource integration practices.
The practice approach, elaborating on the role of contextuality of space, suggests the incorporation
of teleo-affective structures (Schatzki 2002) into the social and cultural. Teleo-affective structures
are a set of acceptable ends, orders,emotions and uses associated or embedded within a context
(differentiated setting) and govern practices (Schatzki 2002). For instance, in a study of brand
community practices by Schau et al. (2009), the specific brand community values, myths and
meanings act as teleo-affective structures that provide virtual contextuality to participants (Arsel
and Bean 2013). Hence, the institutional logic on the gastronomic trail includes the teleo-affective
structures that are introduced by the gastronomic trail settings as well as the social and cultural
meanings and values that guide the actors.
Diving into the three institutional structuring agents of the service eco-system, teleo-affective,
social and cultural, all three have some common elements (Figure 20.5). Firstly, they are all guided
by assumptions, which are reflected in rules of engagement. Secondly, they all comprise of
meanings for the actors that stem from beliefs and values, and lastly, they all generate imaginaries
or aspirations for actors. Hence, in order to understand value co-creation from an ecosystem
perspective, it is important to understand the linkages amongst activities or interactions of resource
integration and the rules, meanings and aspirations enforced by the structuring agents.
Figure 20.5 Institutional Structuring Agents
Discussion
This chapter proposes that the gastronomic trail is a marketing tool that establishes connections
between multiple actors via a gastronomic theme and within the gastronomic ‘terroir’. It is further
argued in this chapter that the interrelationships amongst these elements call for a service
ecosystem approach to understand the value of such trails for all the involved actors. This
conceptualization initiates further discussions on three subjects that help understand gastronomic
tourism. First, it withdraws from the dyadic relationship between the producer and consumer
evident in extant studies and adopts an ecosystem perspective whereby each actor is recognized
and identified through interdependencies and involvement in value (co-)creation. This is a
departure from current conceptualizations in tourism where only one type of actor-actor
connection (tourist-business or business-business) is conceptualized at a time. Investigating and
identifying the multiple actors involved in a specific trail service ecosystem is of theoretical
importance but can also greatly inform the management as well as further development of the trail.
Secondly, the service ecosystem perspective accounts for contextual relationships including social,
cultural as well as material interdependencies that bring together multiple actors in the process.
This is particularly helpful to understand gastronomic tourism where actors are related and co-
create value not only through economic exchanges but also through spatial and social interactions.
Hence, thisalso triggers thinking about value beyond utility maximization or economic exchanges
and therefore opens up important areas for value research.
Another way forward in gastronomic tourism research is through understanding the activities and
interactions in the gastronomic service ecosystem using a practice approach. Conceptualizing
resource integration as practices involves distributing agency to human and ‘non-human’ actors
that guide the gastronomic experience. Hence, the socio-materiality of objects (food and beverage
products, trail maps, brochures) that form part of the theme and space (socio-cultural
understandings of terroir, milieu, landscape, geography) becomes an important area of research.
In addition, understanding the different institutional structures governing the practices may
positively influence value (co-) creation. Hence, there is a need to further understand resource
integration practices in gastronomic trails to create superior trail experiences.



Abstract: Recently land-use planning and green environment services have been considered as inseparable parts of the design of trail paths for a sustainable development. At present there is need of a holistic overview of land uses and land cover, to be linked with the natural environment and regional development. The key determinants of such an approach embody changes in the wake of drivers and anthropocentric changes as well as changes in global greenhouse gases, causing climate change and affecting global biodiversity. In this study the key determinants and the main research objects of previously developed studies were systematically approached by a search of the literature through the Scopus database using these four fields of keywords: (a) “land use” AND environment AND development, (b) “trail path” in the “article titles” AND the subcategory of “land”, (c) “land use” AND “sustainable development”, and, (d) “sustainable” AND “trail”. The derived documents were collected and organized into the following four main domains, being paired together by: (a) year and country/territory, and, (b) keyword and subject area. The classification of the documents was followed by the calculation of relevant “intensity ratios” as key determinants that disclose the well-defined and the emerging fields of further perspectives regarding land use planning and the particular emerging dynamics of the development of trail paths.
Keywords: land use; trail paths; green environment; sustainable development; intensity ratios; literature review
1. Introduction
Among the most prevalent factors favored in development strategies and urban design policies are those of: land use and environment; territorial marginalization; development in margins and peripheries; ecological construction; and environmental conservation. In addition, taking into consideration the fast-accelerating process of urbanization among almost all developing and developed societies worldwide, there is an imperative need to assess through the integration of statistics and remote sensing data the effect of urbanization on both land-use land-cover change (LULCC) and the water environment. The ultimate goal of such policies is the development and the prioritization of ecological planning to support decision-makers in practice [1].
In the agrarian context the high expansion of the agroforestry system has significantly contributed to meeting the environmental and socio-economic needs of local communities following the principles of sustainable development. In this context it was recommended that the primary focus should be on changes observed in endangered habitats and ecosys- tems such as shrub/woodland, grassland, and barren land to enhance environmental protection. Indeed, among the natural enemies of such sensitive ecosystems are climate change and the reported higher global temperature, since temperature decrease is associ- ated with the increase in woodland, grassland and farmland, and temperature increase with urbanized and unexploited lands. Therefore, global warming—caused by an increase in CO2 resulting in LULCC and by human activities—may be the primary reason for global rising temperatures especially among densely populated cities. Consequently, the change
   Land 2023, 12, 1041. https://doi.org/10.3390/land12051041 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/land
Land 2023, 12, 1041
2 of 25
 in regional thermal conditions reduces both local humidity and land-atmosphere flux exchange. Thus, a low atmosphere flux exchange is a key contributor to the spread of atmospheric pollutants and the deposition of atmospheric particles [2].
Another reality of the impact of land use on regional communities, such as those of coastal areas, is a greater environmental consciousness at promoting the overall process of coastal land-use planning in a collaborative and transparent way [3]. Indeed, since landscape is important to attract new rural residents and visitors, there is growing recogni- tion among coastal territories on both sides of the Atlantic that the natural environment supports rural growth, but it is also of the utmost importance to consider the natural environment and rural development as unsupported assumptions that underlie policies in both regions [3]. Furthermore, it is also crucial for local communities to control the degree of land use, possibly at a different pace (moderate up to intensified) even within the mainland of the same country(ies), as in the case of Chinese provinces. Relevant re- search has also concentrated on conservation tillage benefits—including potential carbon sequestration, the embodying of nutrients, and increased yield—all being considered as key aspects of land-use natural-environment interactions to promote specific technologies that are directed to dryland farming systems at a local scale of analysis [4].
The scope of this review study is to present a holistic overview of the current status of land use and land cover, in alignment with the natural environment and regional develop- ment. The key determinants of ensuing changes in these contexts in the wake of drivers and anthropocentric changes as well as changes in global greenhouse gases (GHGs), causing climate change and affecting biodiversity in global biosphere, are also examined. While these key determinants are also the research objects of previously developed studies [5], an informed debate and consensus on growth, poverty and the environment nexus should be conceptualized to manage urban growth in transit corridors being characterized by mixed land use, compaction, walkability, and development focused around public transit areas. Therefore, modeling approaches to organize, sort, and analyze spatial data including aspects of land use, transportation, and environment have also been reported [6]. Moreover, the constraints referred to in the literature of transferring urban spatial forms out of the center, as well as the uncontrolled expansion of large cities and urban sprawl, have been imperative problems that necessitate the employment of indicators to quantitatively deter- mine the characteristics of development of areas around large cities [7]. Such indicators can further identify issues and problems regarding spatial development of the natural environment. Finally, regions of high ecological significance, such as marine receiving environments for the open coasts, harbors, estuaries, or regions of high development in industry and in urban expansion—in which LULCC has changed intensively within the last few decades of analysis—have also been considered [8,9].
2. Methodology and Analysis
Land use and amenities have been directly and commonly related to rural devel- opment and environment [3,10], regional population, resources and environmental de- velopment [11], conservation tillage on sustainable land use following global long-term studies [4], as well as governmental-politics practices on land use, environment and devel- opment [12,13]. Under such a widespread and early-developed production of the literature, the methodology of this study has been developed by a search of the literature in the first trimester of the year 2023 using the following four fields of keywords in the Scopus database: (a) the joint co-presentation of the terms “land use” AND environment AND development in the “article titles”, (b) the joint co-presentation of the “trail path” in the
“article titles” AND the subcategory of “land”, (c) “land use” AND “sustainable devel- opment”, and, (d) “sustainable” AND “trail”, out of the total of the “trail path”-derived documents. Subsequently, these derived documents were collected and organized into four main domains, being paired together by: (a) year and country/territory, and, (b) keyword and subject area. Selected literature studies taken from the review study conducted were

Land 2023, 12, 1041
3 of 25
 classified in fields and the four (coupled) domains. These reviewed studies have been presented in subsections of Section 2, below.
2.1. Key Aspects and Considerations on the Jointly Reported “Land Use” AND “Environment” AND “Development” Keywords
2.1.1. Built-Natural Environment Interactions
Land use can constitute the basis to develop indicators that can determine spatial development of the environment and that can simultaneously transfer urban spatial forms out of its center, as well as the uncontrolled expansion of large cities and urban sprawl. This situation has proven particularly problematic when these processes take place in environmentally sensitive areas, thus necessitating proper indicators that can quantitatively determine the characteristics of development of areas around large cities while defining problems and identifying issues of prioritization in spatial development of the natural environment [7].
The prevalent and most controversial issue that links land use in the natural-built environment is the identification of those mechanisms and concepts of urban management in general, together with the management of urban land uses in city centers in particular. Consequently, research has been directed to investigate the extent of how to use these factors optimally in order to achieve the best distribution of their uses in a sustainable way that could foster sustainable development in the city center by integrating the principles of sustainability in the urban management process [14–16]. Under this logic there is a vibrant sustainable center and the concepts of sustainability and sustainable development can be also determined by their clear objectives, dimensions, standards, and approaches, in addition to defining the sustainable city center and its components, disclosing those theoretically-generated indicators of sustainable urban management that could be ex- tracted [14]. In addition, the relevant research can also point out those constraints towards adopting the principles of sustainability within the context of current urban management, which is mainly attributed to a questionnaire on non-conformal or abiding trends among the indicators surveyed and applied to the current urban management system [14].
Another critical point of natural-built environment interactions with land use is that contemporary urban agglomeration shows how cities grow and expand within a shorter period by overlooking the existence of natural ecosystems. Such undermined natural ecosystems are those embodying wetland and water-related resources all over the world which have historically been given less priority, an issue which is acute in urban areas, especially among developing and densely populating areas worldwide. In such economies the water and their water-related resources are not maintained properly, resulting in the continuous deterioration of wetlands and water bodies. Therefore, it is critical to carry out research to acknowledge some strategies and motivations of development in wetland which can, subsequently, contribute to the enrichment of the natural environment of the areas studied under the principles of natural chemistry and land-water ecology [17]. In a relevant study the water balance and the intensification of cases of flooding were considered in a land-use scenario, in order for suitable soil-water conservation measures to be recommended towards mitigating the adverse effects of bioenergy [18].
Another priority issue in the built environment refers to the development of campuses that are predominately characterized by low impact development (LID) for environmental sustainability. In these cases land use is the critical factor in the development of campuses that potentially pose an environmental threat, such as the impact of runoff. In such a case the environmental development could be held on large, contoured farm land, especially in remote and sub-rural areas, but this condition also affects the infiltration of rainwater, making necessary a master plan evaluation of the development of campuses using LID parameters. Such a master plan has to primary determine the optimal zone and the types of the scheduled LID [19].
In the relevant literature a contentious issue that has emerged regarding the urban- natural environment interactions is the design of an appropriate waste-sensitive infrastruc-

Land 2023, 12, 1041
4 of 25
 ture that can reduce peak discharges, which is directly linked with the ways in which land use can contribute to the operation of surface and sub-surface processes. Such an under- standing of tropical urban environments remains under-examined, while the rainfall-runoff process in tropical urban systems experiences a high degree of non-linearity and hetero- geneity. Consequently, in the relevant literature genetic programming was introduced to support a physically interpretative modular model being directed to catchment hydrologi- cal processes by employing a baseflow model and a quick flow model in order to provide a hydrograph simulation of flow. Such a model of catchment can meet wider applications regarding land use estimation and a better understanding and quantification of how land use contributes to the baseflow and quickflow components. This model also enables water management in urban contexts aiming at the sustainable development of water under particular climatic and weather characteristics, such as in tropical megacities [20].
Among the modeling-derived studies of high research interest are those that intro- duced land use regression (LUR) models in urban environments to predict air pollution exposure. In such LUR modelling the evaluation of black carbon, being based on bicycle and pedestrian measurements, was adapted to epidemiological studies by employing an appropriate cross-validation scheme and stationary measurement of better, realistic and plausible predictability than similar validation researches [21].
2.1.2. Geospatial Technologies and Analyses
Geospatial technologies support a plethora of land-use planning activities, and when delivered through a web interface/platform, then they facilitate the coordination between different entities involved in the planning process [22–25]. In the relevant literature concep- tual design production was conducted to support a collaborative geographic information system (GIS), a web-based environment for coastal land-use planning among three parties; land use planners, applicants and/or developers, and community stakeholders were able to participate. An applet can allow everyone to view the system, but only real stakeholders can interactively post comments and voice concerns, by editing and adding markups. This system should nurture a coastal community which is environmentally-focused while promoting collaborative and transparent land-use planning [26].
In another geographical region the development of GIS aimed at determining the vulnerability of regionally significant marine receiving environments to land-use impacts, especially in the Auckland Region. The developed GIS can integrate ecological significance, in terms of hydrodynamic modelling and sediment load modelling. The first evaluation and classification stage considers the regional and ecological significance of marine receiving environments, open coasts, harbors and estuaries. The regional marine vulnerability is determined by studying these variables: fetch distance, percentage of intertidal areas, residence time, circulation patterns and their threshold values. This GIS analysis can better integrate land-use controls within particular catchments, such as in the case of the Auckland region, while disclosing important information on marine ecology, coastal vegetation, coastal fish and catchment characteristics [8].
It is also noteworthy that taking into consideration the interactions among land use, transportation, environment, urban growth and walkability, all are aspects of Transit Oriented Development (TOD). Therefore, by using the GIS an analytical integration of land-use, transportation, and the environment can be achieved to manage urban growth based on TOD in the metropolitan area of Jabodetabek, Indonesia. The research focus on GIS suitability is especially efficient in informing development around public transit areas and the improvements at managing urban quality considering the sharp increase in the number of passenger cars and motorcycles and the simultaneous decline of public transport. In this context it is of the utmost importance to identify the applicability of TOD principles in densely populated cities by using GIS as a modelling tool of analysis [6].

Land 2023, 12, 1041
5 of 25
 2.1.3. Land Use and Land Cover Considerations
The marginalization of geographical space is a multifaceted problem that is mainly attributed to environmental viewpoints of land use, landscape and development. This integrated approach offers an overview of the issues that can be jointly considered in alignment with practical real-world examples originating from environmental issues that manifest in marginal areas, including: land use and environment, territorial marginal- ization, development in margins and peripheries [27]. In such a context a well-informed debate on growth, poverty, and the environment nexus should consider land use and land cover reformations as well as the food-energy-environment trade-off, as the key issues and insights disclosed. Indeed, these key issues are also considered as anthropocentric challenges in the global biosphere, as seen in the interplay between climate change and human development in the United Nation’s Millennium Development Goals [5].
The coupled investigation of land use and land cover in monitoring land-use efficiency in Europe showed that between 2012 and 2018, the number of countries moving towards efficient land use doubled, compared to the period 2006–2012 [28], revealing that notable progress towards achieving SDG 11.3.1 [29] was reported in such developed and highly industrialized countries as Portugal and Germany, while almost all the Balkan countries also moved towards more efficient land use [28]. This research trend implies the validity and the applicability of the SDG-land use simulations, scenarios and models, confirming that these scenario simulations of different sustainability levels are conducive to supporting the formulation of sustainable land-use plans covering almost any region of Earth [29–35], while plentiful studies have also reported on other European contexts [36–38].
The outcome of these studies provides comparative analyses between cities or parts of a region or districts of a city. It can be demonstrated that the analyses of such SDG-land-use associations are proven valuable tools to assess the impact of local urban and municipal planning (possibly relocation) policies on urban development. The key aspects of the interrelation between SDGs and the nexus approach in resilient cities and multifunctional land-use systems can stress the importance of economic incentives for successful nexus implementation, providing specific guidance on how to advance sustainable resource management [39–44].
A powerful research linkage has been developed among land use and land cover with socio-economic alternations, mainly focusing on environmental deterioration. Such debates are known as land use and land cover change (LULCC) and historically date back to the beginning of agriculture. In such a study the constraints and the determinants of LULCC in the Ethiopian rift valley region of the Gidabo river sub-basin have been examined for the period 1986–2019 through group discussions and informant interviews, showing an increased share of land cover (46.7%) on the agroforestry system. Such an increase can be the cumulative result of population density, cultural values (Songo, Babbo), traditional beliefs and land policy, resulting from climate change. Equally importantly, the consequences of this agroforestry system expansion are also beneficial to meet the socio-economic and the environmental needs of the local community [45].
In a similar study it was demonstrated that in land systems the equitable managing of trade-offs between planetary boundaries and human development needs presents primary challenges towards sustainability-oriented initiatives. Such initiatives also re- quire knowledge of the nexus between land use, poverty, and environment [46]. Distinct spatial patterns or configurations of these rates point out other important factors at play, thus implying that the concurrence of external influences with local highly contex- tual development potentials introduces critical aspects to shape stable outcomes of the land-use poverty-environment nexus. Subsequently, by addressing such leverage points, more effective development interventions can be guided, being coupled with the need for land-change science in order to better understand our knowledge of place-based land-use indicators, processes and changes [46].

Land 2023, 12, 1041
6 of 25
 2.1.4. The Unification of Land Use with Environment and Development in the Asian Geographical Context
In the relevant literature the available spatial patterns of land use in alignment with the sustainable development of China is vast [47–57]. Among the selected studies re- viewed a study can be highlighted suggesting the five partitions of the optimized objects, including these zones: eco-economic, model-agricultural, core-living, eco-conservation, and coordinated-development [58], in deploying environmental performance assessment to assist domestic agriculture management taking account of economic development and environmental benefits [59]. At this point it is noteworthy that pathways for integrating agricultural practices into ecosystem services, planetary boundaries and sustainable devel- opment goals are not only found in studies referring to China, but have also been reported in similar studies in which the definition of measures and the drawing of strategies to rationally manage the sustainable development of agricultural land use meets a wider research interest [60,61].
Other China-related studies investigated the role of ecosystem services (ES) towards current and future land use considering the implications of sustainable development goals [62], thus introducing an integrated research framework to establish and implement sustainable environmental protection policies and cross-regional and trans-provincial eco- compensation schemes to minimize trade-offs in ES. It was also indicated that forests and water bodies provided the highest overall ES capacity, while the lowest scores were reached in built-up and unused land areas of China [60]. The ES-based studies are not limited to the Chinese context, but have also reported on similar research settings worldwide [63–67].
Among the key ES development principles for island planning are those of ecological construction and environmental conservation. Consequently, an in-the-field study has focused on the world’s largest alluvial island (and the third largest in China) of Chong- ming [1]. This area has sustained a steady urbanization progress at an accelerating pace since the 2000s, mainly due to favored developmental strategies and policies. The key as- pects of further consideration are the relevance of the effects on the local environment from urbanization, as well as the policy and managerial implications of urbanization towards sustainable development [1].
The spatial evolution of densely contemporary rural areas characterizes substantial changes in the environment, climate, land use and cover types. In situ observations, statistical data and remote sensing images for a typical case, that of Jiangsu Province, China, in the period 1980–2012 have been examined, stressing that urbanization (92.7%) is primarily caused by the loss of farmland and generates an increase in emissions of pollutants from industrial sources and wastewater, which are most frequently derived from urban domestic sources. It is noteworthy that urbanization increases the scattering radiance and Earth’s albedo and local scale warming, while a correlation analysis can be grounded on the temperature decrease with the increase in woodland, grassland and farmland, as well as by the temperature increase with the increase in urbanized and unexploited lands [2]. In this study it was reported that the temperature increase in Jiangsu province in China is attributed to an increase in carbon dioxide (CO2) followed by the land use and land cover change due to human activities. The temperature increase is also related to changes in regional thermal conditions that reduce both local humidity and land-atmosphere flux exchange and simultaneously intensify the spread and deposition of atmospheric pollutants and their embodied particles [2].
The LULCC and the environmental effects in Changshu, Eastern coastal China, were also analyzed using high-resolution LandsatTM data in four yearly time intervals in the period 1990–2006 [9]. The variables of the analysis were those of socio-economic data and water environmental quality monitoring data from research institutes and governmental departments. The reported LULCC in Changshu during the aforementioned period was mainly attributed to industrialization, urbanization and agricultural structure reformations of local LULCC [9].

Land 2023, 12, 1041
7 of 25
 The evaluation of the coordinated development among subsystems of a system was designed by system division into several subsystems, the evaluation of these by employing the harmony degree and the development degree, as well as the classification criteria of idea goal state (ID), secondary objective state (SE) and inferior objective state (IN) [68], in order to investigate the land use, the natural environment and the socio-economic situation in the Chinese town of Tongzhou [68].
2.2. Key Aspects and Considerations on the Jointly Reported “Trail Path” AND Subcategory of “Land” Keywords
This section represents selected research studies of local interest in jointly addressing the role of land to trail paths. Therefore, the selected paradigms were collected for the Mediterranean basin countries of Italy [69] and Greece [70], and in Northern Europe (UK) [71], as well as in Asia (South Korea) [72].
In the relevant literature a study looked at a coastal urban reserve located in Bibione (Metropolitan City of Venice, Veneto, Northern Italy). This is among the major tourist beach resorts of the Mediterranean basin, with dune plantation forests for recreation, but also sensitive soil and vegetation forestry. Considering the necessity of clearly defined recreational trails and boundaries, a GIS-based and land-driven survey was employed considering the interpretative trails in sand dune plantation forests, where each cell of a sampling grid was surveyed in the field at a grain size of 10-m, being an appropriate scale for both visitors and to accurately assess vegetation and stand structure. The trail was tracked in alignment with the land suitability and visibility key factors that were applicable to the endemic dune plantation forests and the whole trail was optimized in order to firstly achieve the lowest cumulative-resistance value possible and secondly to amend to a situation where a fine-grained alignment of recreational trails of environmental impact is required [69].
In another landscape morphology a study looked at the behavioral attitudes of citizens of the mountainous region of Evros (mountainous regional unit of East Macedonia and Thrace, Northern Greece), while considering the contribution of the trail paths to the protection of the local culture and the promotion of the natural environment of the region. Through structured questionnaires and personal interviews data collection and analysis were accompanied by descriptive statistical methods as well as multivariate analysis techniques. The research results showed that the attitudes of citizens are directly or indirectly influenced by various factors, such as that of age, which directly affect the views of citizens towards the trail paths, with the younger ones having more positive views. Other important and positive predictors of citizens’ viewpoints were the type of activity in the trail path and the easy route structure, which support leisure and hiking activities [70].
Another interesting aspect of linking trail path and land use is the growing role of social media data in providing new insights into phenomena about which there is little information from conventional sources, especially promoting the aesthetic management of landscape and collecting the perceptions of visitors to the Pennine Way National Trail (start: Edale, Derbyshire and end: Kirk Yetholm, Scottish Borders), United Kingdom (UK), which passes through land managed under the Environmental Stewardship Scheme (ESS). Public Twitter messages (tweets) is the main social medium that can support the assessment of how and to what extent ESS maintains landscape character within the trail corridor. In such a way abundant information from low-cost sources is valued as a competitive resource to complement, while not fully replacing, conventional data sources such as questionnaires and interviews, enhancing our experience of how social media and environmental management can effectively manage conservation bodies and areas worldwide [71].
From another cultural background, among the most challenging points of view re- garding the shifting modes in urban and rural landscapes are the corresponding changes in social relations in South Korea and in particular the local governmental and developmental policies of ecotourism development [72]. Such policies often rely on a binary understanding

Land 2023, 12, 1041
8 of 25
 of landscapes, and like all binaries, pre-modern and modern landscapes they are inex- tricably interlinked. In the case of ecotourism development on Jeju Island (the largest island of South Korea) it is critical to discern how class struggles over material landscapes and discursively-produced, imaginary landscape ownership emerged. Consequently, the research focus was directed to utilize understanding of how the individual and collective experience of local people has generated tensions around urban-centered modernization in South Korea through the principles of political ecology, especially considering rural landscapes with uneven geography and versatile economic development, as an Asian NIC (Newly Industrialized Country) [72].
2.3. Key Aspects and Considerations on the Jointly Reported “Land Use” AND “Sustainable Development” Keywords
In the relevant literature there are numerous studies devoted to land use and sus- tainable development, especially considering the published United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), showing a wider geographical, practical and management plu- ralism [29,51,62,73,74]. Researchers have also argued that while conventional instruments for land-use planning have been increasingly criticized, economic instruments (including taxes, subsidies and tradeable permits) in the context of land-use steering have received growing attention in practice and research [75]. In a similar study it was stated out that land-use configurations are explicitly related to the outcomes of numerous economic, so- cial and environmental policies, therefore efficiency in the use of natural resources, such as space, can positively contribute to sustainability efforts from a regional development perspective [76]. In this context land-use configurations illustrate how local developmental trends have thwarted efforts to achieve sustainability and regional development as laid out in the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), as in the case of land and infrastructure usage within Irish metropolitan areas [76].
Indeed, since there is still a lack of SDG-oriented assessment of urban land use at national level, even in large and densely-populated countries such as China, there is still a need to address the problems of the randomness and fuzziness within evaluation, which tends to cause more uncertainties [77]. In this study spatial and temporal patterns of urban land-use sustainability for China at the prefecture level in the period 2004–2019 were reported by classifying the types of urban land-use sustainability [77]. The development level of urban land-use sustainability (ULUS) in China was high in the east and low in the west, while high-value hotspots were mainly distributed in primary and secondary urban agglomerations in China. The urban development level is primarily attributed to anthropocentric activities, whereas natural conditions constrain the improvement of the coordination level. It can also be noted that cities with a higher development level often had a wide range of coordination level, and suggestions were put forward for different regions to achieve sustainable land use [77].
A similar study employed remotely-sensed data on population and land covers to analyze spatiotemporal variations in the land consumption rate (LCR), the population growth rate (PGR) and the ratio of LCR to PGR (LCRPGR) of 31 provinces in China in the period 1995–2015, showing that nine SDGs had synergies with LCRPGR in developing economic zones, exceeding the total number of synergy relationships yielded by LCR and PGR, indicating that LCRPGR that considers both LCR and PGR exerts more impact on SDG implementations compared with the single perspective concerning LCR or PGR [78]. In addition, the improvement of land-use efficiencies can facilitate SDG implementation as an essential action in undeveloped or fast emerging economies, such as China, in order to better regulate urban expansion and population growth [78].
Another research tool of particular interest in Chinese land-use sustainable-development impact is the concept of land use functions (LUFs) that has been widely employed to study and manage sustainable development [79]. However, it has been reported that LUF employ- ment is barely based on actual land use, therefore an improvement of the LUF framework can evaluate the monetary value of economic, social, and environmental LUF with the

Land 2023, 12, 1041
9 of 25
 use of land-use data, disclosing how different LUFs relate to each other at a regional level, such as in Shandong, China [29]. Monetary values of economic and social functions can be positively correlated, but are both negatively correlated with environmental function. In addition, it was also suggested that the quantitative trade-offs of these LUFs are insufficient, implying that their spatial balance requires further attention [79].
Another field of analysis is the historical impact of changes in land use and land cover (LULC) on land transformation planning, and anthropocentric and natural impact evaluation. In such a research approach, obtaining information on LULC change was able to provide scientific information for decision-making on achieving sustainable develop- ment in the Tano River Basin of Ghana [80]. This study covered the period 1986–2020 and it was shown that the research outputs were not only useful for formulating and implementing national policies and programs, but also in contributing to the assessment and monitoring of progress towards attaining Sustainable Development Goal 13 (climate action), considering that LULC change can further contribute to carbon emissions that lead to climate change and global warming [80]. In another African-context analysis the extent of degradation and pattern of land-use land-cover change (LULCC) in the Mount Bamboutos landscape in Western Cameroon was investigated using Landsat satellite images from 1980, 2000 and 2018. A sample of 261 household farmers was surveyed shaping a conceptual model that increases inclusive stakeholder participation and sustainability in local land use planning, and enhances our understand of the different agricultural activities in the landscape occurred [81].
Among the anthropocentric actions reported in the literature that significantly influ- ence contemporary trends in (peri-)urban sustainability, especially considering the past decades of the human-caused depletion of natural resources and environmental pollution, is the adaptive reuse. Indeed, adaptive reuse developments incorporate a scientifically pre- defined set of conceptual theories, policy principles, and practical tools, as all the available data suggest, in order to achieve a good balance between invested capital, ecological con- servation, preservation of the cultural heritage and sustainable urban regenerative renewal and to promote essential actions of adaptive reusing for urban and spatial masterplans towards advancing sustainable and circular cities [82].
2.4. Key Aspects and Considerations on the “Sustainable” AND “Trails” Keywords
The sustainability attributes of trails have been an emerging and steadily growing topic of research interest during the last two decades of analysis. The sustainability attributes cover a wide spectrum of topics and ways in which community-based tourism [83] could be implemented, such as:
− cultural heritage of historic areas such as that of the historical core of Saida (Old Saida), Lebanon [84],
− the Inca Trail passes in the northern frontier region of Ecuador where archaeological and historical tourism is considered a source of income and culture, incorporating and creating important cultural and natural tourism locations as well as an infrastructure that could generate income for the communities through revaluation [85].
− relating natural spaces to mental health among university communities where trail systems allow students to interact with nature without having to leave the area [86],
− the paddle-trail-related literature and the many different funding options to man- age the creation and maintenance of paddle trails for paddle sports (e.g., kayaking and canoeing) [87],
− the transnational hiking trail via Carpathia connecting seven European countries and promoting an ecologically compatible landscape and infrastructure development, offering sound possibilities to revisit leisure time activities, in alignment with interna- tional encounters, natural experiences and the maintenance and further enhancement of the regional cultural heritage [88].

Land 2023, 12, 1041
10 of 25
 These studies have also focused on environmental management practices and the implications of running multiple activities on tracks and trails on public land, particularly in terms of social sustainability especially among developed and industrialized economies such as those of North America and Australia [83], and the presence of ecotourists on trails in Brazil [89]. It is also noteworthy regarding the paddle trails that these can support a variety of user funding mechanisms for trail development as well as paddler perceptions about trail development which are considered as viable forms of economic development. In addition, awareness of the value of paddle trails as an economic regeneration tool increases the willingness to pay. A range of management implications from this research included information and educational programs, marketing partnerships and targeted incentive offers to those groups that are unwilling to pay [87].
In this context the maintenance and the sustainability of existing or new trails are unavoidably related to the condition and the usability of trails, being the critical consid- eration of land managers charged with providing recreational access while preserving natural conditions, and to visitors who seek high quality recreational opportunities and experiences. While there exists an adequate number of trail management publications that provide prescriptive guidance for the design, the construction and the maintenance of natural-surfaced trails, published studies to provide a scientific basis for this guidance are sparse [90]. In this study the researchers modeled and clarified the influence of sustainability factors on trail soil loss, which could be effectively manipulated by trail professionals in order to sustain high traffic while minimizing soil loss over time. The emerging key factors were those of trail grade, slope alignment angle, tread drainage features, and the amount of rock in tread substrates, all offering an evaluation and improvement tool of sustainability [90].
In the last four decades of analysis, it has been reported that many European rural areas suffer from depopulation. Indeed, depopulation has become a significant issue for local culture and built-heritage conservation, making necessary the investigation of nature-oriented tourism and its vital contribution to the economic, social, and re- vitalization strategies adopted from local communities. In this context it is critical to further investigate how digital tools can be used to map and to create a territorial trail system between municipalities; and, subsequently, to determine the operations neces- sary for reactivation [91]. In this study a web platform was created with a system of virtual itineraries between villages in Italy, named “The Golden Leaves Paths”. Then, the creation of analysis factsheets guided the maintenance of paths and the design of iconic signage with artistic illustrations based on the oak leaves leitmotif to be installed along the paths. It was argued that a local social promotion association can employ the outcomes, technical drawings, and strategies to reactivate paths, being considered as an inseparable element for nature-oriented tourism to foster the territorial and cultural heritage of the villages through the digital platform developed [91].
It is also noteworthy that when protected areas transcend multiple jurisdictions and landownerships, effective governance requires the engagement of multiple institu- tions. In the context, in the United States 11 National Scenic Trails (NSTs) extend across multiple states, landownerships, and jurisdictions, where the development of regional and national partnerships can enhance management capacity. In this respect, trail gover- nance requires a systematic approach to support the coordination among governmental and nongovernmental partners at multiple scales [92]. In such an analysis secondary data were collected to define those trail characteristics and governance to better explore existing trail capacities. The four governmental dimensions that shape trail management of NSTs were those of: structural and foundational elements, landownership regimes, trail funding, and partnerships. Understanding these dimensions can inform managers of NSTs and other protected areas crossing multiple jurisdictions, guide effective gov- ernance and employ suiting strategies having recognized those strengths and gaps in institutional form and capacity [92].

Land 2023, 12, 1041
11 of 25
 The sustainability concept is also directly related to anthropocentric activities on trails, such as the physical exercise of hiking. Hiking is one of the most popular forms of exercise in the alpine region [93]. However, besides its health benefits, hiking is the alpine activity with the highest incidence of cardiac events. Most incidents occur due to overexertion or underestimation of the physiological strain of hiking. Therefore, individual exercise intensity for a hiking tour will be predicted and visualized in digital maps. A study first validated a 1-km outdoor cardio trekking test trail at 2 different study sites between Austria and Germany [93]. Then, exercise intensity measures on 8-km hiking trails were evaluated during hiking to estimate overall hiking intensity among 144 healthy adults (aged more than 45 years old) who performed a treadmill test in the laboratory and a 1-km hiking test outdoors. A portable spirometry device measured gas exchange, as well as heart rate, walking speed, ventilation, GPS location, and altitude throughout the tests, showing that individual prediction of exercise capacity in healthy individuals with an interest in hiking could prevent hiking-associated cardiovascular events caused by overexertion allowing individual hiking route recommendations derived from individual performance on a standardized cardio trekking test trail [93]. In a similar study, thru-hiking the Appalachian Trail (AT) is valued as an adventure of a lifetime that necessitates long-term planning and knowledge of challenges and practices in the outdoors [94]. One important but oft-ignored step is to establish awareness about sustainable practices captured in Leave No Trace (LNT) principles towards the lower possible impacts on the trail. Therefore, it is important for researchers to understand the practices of hikers relating to trail sustainability and LNT. Then, a better understanding of AT-hiking discussions can explore their connections with sustainable practices in the outdoors, particularly informing AT stakeholders and researchers in the field about the hikers’ practices and the role of social media platforms to support sustainable trail management [94]. Similarly, in the relevant literature and European geographical context trail management priorities to improve sustainable design and visitor experience were identified [95]. In this case the most popular hiking trail in Portugal, located in the Algarve region, was investigated to reveal the recreational opportunities of the trail’s management, development stage, preferred trail attributes and determinants of trail visitor loyalty. The recreational opportunity was based on a spectrum framework and the logistic regression model. Planners and managers could utilize these results to identify strategies for nature conservation and sustainable trail development, simultaneously maximizing trail-related experiences among loyal trail users [95].
In addition to hiking, another attractive and challenging form of physical exercise on trails is that of mountain biking. In this activity it is crucial to determine the impact upon the environment, which is primary determined by rider behaviors. Therefore, it is important to understand how mountain bikers interact with the natural environment and explore their attitudes towards sustainability [96]. In this European-based study the surveyed mountain bikers disclosed that the connection to nature was an important source of motivation and the use of mountain bike trails increased the riders’ appreciation of and willingness to protect nature, with a large majority having taken direct action to do so [96]. It is also interesting that mountain bikers are willing to support the trail maintenance through the provision of personal labor or financially. Although most mountain bikers make use of wet or illegal trails, incidence of conflict is relatively low. Sustainable trails are supporting the sustainability of the trail itself in alignment with wider environmental sustainability while reducing the environmental impact and actively protecting nature [96].
Mountain biking is considered an extreme sport that demands a natural setting, while exerting a specific environmental impact if not regulated and designed correctly. Therefore, using GIS data in terms of topography, existing cycle paths and vegetation and comparing this with the guidelines set by the International Mountain Biking Association (IMBA) body, the IMBA formulated specific trail-design guidelines to adopt sustainable principles in trail design to lessen the environmental impact [97]. In this context researchers indicated four major environmental concerns, these being soil erosion, vegetation loss, water deterioration, wildlife impacts, along with their solutions. It was argued that the feasibility of the existing

Land 2023, 12, 1041
12 of 25
 trail and specific alternate sustainable trail routes in the same sites could shape different trailing systems such as white, green, blue, and black trails and planting designs in order to curb the soil erosion in the case area [97].
In addition to the bodily advantages of sustainable trails, the cultural value cannot be undermined. In such studies, heritage trails are critical to sustainable city planning since they play an important role in confronting severe and irreversible climate change [56]. Heritage trails include all the aforesaid types of body exercises such as walking, hiking, and biking, on paths that link features of historical interest. The physical destinations of sustainable trails are actually those of paths in parks, trails connecting villages, and walking routes in the historic centers of cities [98]. It can be also demonstrated that historic conservation is not a sustainable practice, since heritage sites can be constructed with non- sustainable materials, while occupying valuable space that city planners could otherwise use. Heritage trails can both provide access to cultural sites, and can be equally beneficial to the environment [98]. Indeed, heritage sites should promote emissions-free activities and simultaneously are commonly green spaces that offset carbon emissions. It is also reasonable that when creating buy-in, constructing heritage trails should also include a wide range of stakeholders from across the community [98].
The sustainable development of urban historical areas is relevant to their potential as cultural tourism sites, thus maintaining the local cultural assets and ensuring sustainability of any development intervention in these areas via a master planning process that balances all concurring developmental aspects [84]. The critical point here is the sharing of urban development in historic areas to achieve the sustainability goals of the involved areas through nodes of interaction that are stimulated by the heritage trail; conservation and rehabilitation, interpretation, and micro-economic development (as in the case study of the historical core of Saida (Old Saida), Lebanon) [84].
Another interesting association of sustainable trails and humanitarian values was studied, in order to explore the preferences of trail-running race participants for sustainable use of country parks in Hong Kong, measuring the willingness to pay of race participants for the provision of drinking water fountains, biodiversity conservation, trail maintenance and green auditing of race events [99]. The results showed a latent desire among trail runners to contribute to the preservation of natural areas through a surcharge on top of race entry fees. Mean willingness to pay for the provision of drinking water, conservation of biodiversity and trail maintenance was calculated in monetary values while, from stakeholder interviews, it was concluded that the proposed fund-raising mechanism of a surcharge on top of the race entry fee would be readily accepted by trail runners, race organizers, NGOs and the government. Sustainable trails should also tackle environmental degradation caused by trail running whilst instigating a more democratic management approach between the government and other park stakeholders [99].
Closing this literature overview of sustainable trails it is also interesting to note that similar studies have recommended that managerial support of the actions that need to be taken towards sustainable development and sustainable tourism in mountains would involve a training course on the actions needed for decision-makers, managers and politi- cians whose responsibility is to develop sustainable tourism in the mountains [100]. Given this broad recommendation, the content of the training and action needed should be based on the concept of territorial resilience, as well as aspects of complex thinking and planning based on a systemic approach [100].
From an environmental perspective significant topographical, ecological, use-related, and managerial diversity are highly linked to trail degradation, as well as to core types of trail impact, including: trail soil loss, widening and muddiness. Therefore, research focus on these key aspects should disclose a more precise and systematic understanding of trail impact, revealing the interrelationships developed between trail degradation pro- cesses [101]. In such a way, the sustainability advantages of trails are impacting on low grades and side-hill alignments, also considering the importance of landform grade to determine the susceptibility of trails to degradation and the influence of routing decisions;

Land 2023, 12, 1041
13 of 25
these being preferably based on methodological considerations for trail alignment metrics and trail impact indicators [101].
From an economic perspective the most financially sustainable model of long-distance trail management is the community approach, containing a partnership between govern- ment and a not-for-profit organization. This proposal extends the income stream options and reduces overheads through the use of volunteers for maintenance. In addition, tourism strategies, such as marketing, promotion, and product and destination development, fur- ther extend the trail’s financial sustainability by maximizing user numbers and partnering with businesses. This can further increase regional economic benefits and improve the user experience [102]. In particular, trails can substantially decrease the problems arising from increased visitor numbers to forested nature areas, under the preconditions that they provide users with a desirable experience, they establish visitor flows through land- scapes and they provide effective risk management solutions [103], such as in the cases of Kunisaki Peninsula Usa GIAHS long trail [104] and at trail-race events held within 26 protected mountain areas in Catalonia where protected mountain area managers and trail-race managers were helped to diagnose the impact that such races have on the land, showing that profit-making organizations generated a greater degree of sustainability where development of the territory had been concerned than did non-profit entities [105].
3. Results
The graphical representation of the conducted literature search, based on the four fields of keywords (a) “land use” AND “environment” AND “development”, (b) “trail path” AND subcategory: “land”, (c) “land use” AND “sustainable development”, and, (d) “sustainable” AND “trail”, as well as the four main domains of (being paired together
Land 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW by two): (a) year and country/territory, and, (b) keyword and subject area, is sh1o4wonf 2in6 Figures 1–4, below.
Figure 1. Literature profile of documents retrieved for the “Year” domain. Figure 1. Literature profile of documents retrieved for the “Year” domain.
Literature profile per “Country/Territory”
16 1514
1413 13
12 10
11
   25 20 15 10
5 0
Literature profile per “Year”
23
0000 00 0 01
10 00
533343535 53
01 2 20 10 2 10 0 1 2 1 01 02 2 10 1 1221 0 20 1 000
Year of publication
67768668
“land use” AND “environment” AND “development” “trail path” AND subcategory: “land”
“land use” AND “sustainable development” "sustainable" AND "trail"
   10 8
13
14
5
6
        Number of publications
ublications
           777
p

Land 2023, 12, 1041 14 of 25 Land 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 25
   Literature profile per “Country/Territory”
16 1514
1413 13
11
866
6 344
4 121
12
10 7
2 0
Land 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW
Country/Territory
“land use” AND “environment” AND “development”
“trail path” AND subcategory: “land”
“land use” AND “sustainable development”
000 000
15 of 25
definitions, terminologies, and research interests. Therefore, at an attempt to collect, to
"sustainable" AND "trail"
group and to organize this conceptually dispersed and heterogeneous material into ho- mogeneous keywords, it was decided to keep traceable (for the scope of this review study)
   77
5
32
22
12 0
2 10
2 121
0 00
12 0
00
0 01
0
000 000 01
0 00
              Number of publications
only the top 15 of them, in terms of all documents retrieved. This research practice enabled Figure 2. Literature profile of documents retrieved for the “Country/Territory” domain.
Figure 2. Literature profile of documents retrieved for the “Country/Territory” domain.
a more precise and concise representation, as shown in Figure 4 and Table 1, respectively.
Figure 1 revealed that the two fields of keywords “land use” AND “sustainable de-
  Agricultural and Biological Sciences
1
of “sustainable” AND “trail”, followed by the field of keywords ND “development”. Contrarily, sporadic and sparsely
Social-Decision Sciences
n M
ail path” AND subcategory:
ch as Italy and
s, as well as the
velopment”, as well as that of “sustainable” AND “trail” sustain the higher number of
Literature profile per “Subject Area”
documents reported in the timespan of last four decades, followed by the other two fields
of keywords “land use” AND “environment” AND “development”, “trail path” AND
Arts and Humanities 0130
subcategory: “land”. This field of keywords has shown a rather recently emerging field of
Multidisciplinary 10 4 0
analysis, being also attributed to a shift in everyday living conditions of citizens world-
Biochemistry, Genetics and Molecular Biology 1031
wide towards a healthier lifestyle and constant seeking for personal leisure activities in a
Economics,EconometricsandFinance 0 8 0
clean and greener natural environment. Similarly, based on Figure 2 it was shown that
Earth and PlanetacryoSucnietnrcies o 0ely populated (western) economies, or wide spatial areas of man- agement an m (such as that of African and emerging economies) are particu-
Computer Science
larly interested in the joint fields of keywords “land use” AND “sustainable develop-
ment”, as
Engineering 10 “land use”
28
Environmental Science
investigate
“land”, bei Greece, bei
COVID 19 pandemic. In Figures 3 and 4 the literature profiles of the retrieved documents
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
per “Subject Area” and “Keyword” are also depicted.
Number of publications
It is noteworthy that, based on Figure 3, the top 10 subject areas of the most fre-
“land use” AND “environment” AND “development”
quently-published documents can be grouped in the following 5 pairs (in descending or-
der): (Environmental Science, Social-Decision Sciences) > (Engineering, Agricultural and
“trail path” AND subcategory: “land”
Biological Sciences) > (Computer Science, Earth and Planetary Sciences) > (Economics
Eco“nlaonmdeutrsices”aAnNdDFi“nsaunsctea,iBniaobclheedmeisvteryloGpmenentitc”s and Molecular Biology) > (Multidisci-
plinary, Arts and Humanities). The most reported fields of environment, socio-economics,
"sustainable" AND "trail"
agriculture, earth-planetary-nature, and computer science can be attributed to the pleth-
         f5ei1ther1d5ens
d develop
21 15
3
4
18
well as that
ent
7
10
AND “envir
onment” A
7
4
56
17
d studies we
re reported i
the field of
keywords “tr
14
4
81
17
ng mainly r ng also vuln
eported in erable to the
editerranea concurring e
n European conomic and
countries, su energy crise
Subject Area
 Keyword #
1 2 3
Keyword Description
Land Use OR Land Cover/Change/Planning/Erosion OR Trail Sustainable(-ity)/Rural Development/and Economy Geography/Geospatial/GIS/and Spatial Analysis Scale/Remote Sensing
Keyword Title
Land Sustainability Spatial Geography
ora/high number of input data and modelling research specializations. Contrarily, the bi- Figure 3. Literature profile of documents retrieved for the “Subject Area” domain.
Foilgougrieca3.lLaintedrahturmeapnroitfialreiaonfdfoiecludmseanrtessreptariresveelydfaonrdthleoo“SsuelbyjercetlAatreda”tdootmheaisne.lected classifi-
cations of reviewing. Moreover, regarding the domain of “keyword” employed, Figure 4, Table 1. The keywords description of the top-15 keywords (in terms of frequency reported), regard-
it is noteworthy that the retrieved documents were highly dispersed in terms of ing the four “fields of keywords” classified.
            Environment(s)al

             11
Europe OR Eurasia/Asia
Continental Europe OR Asia
12 13
Land 2023, 12, 1041 14
15
15 of 25
Water Accounting(s)/and Footprint/Virtual Water/Management/Planning/Policy(-ies)/Scarcity /Resource Management Climate/and Change/Environment Development/Degree/Policy
Carbon/and Dioxide/Sequestration/Footprint
Water
Climate Development
Carbon
   120 115 113 100
80 60 40
38 23
Literature profile per “Keyword”
34
201010915 12109
0
8
11
3 3
12
822 3 21 222248 4 33 7 5 45 41 31
0 11 1500 070002 00 00
Keyword (title)
“land use” AND “environment” AND “development” “trail path” AND subcategory: “land”
“land use” AND “sustainable development” "sustainable" AND "trail"
       Number of publications
   23
35
86
     Figure 4. Literature profile of documents retrieved for the “Keyword” domain. Figure 4. Literature profile of documents retrieved for the “Keyword” domain.
Based on Table 1 and Figure 4 it can be noted that the top 15 keywords of Figure 4
Figure 1 revealed that the two fields of keywords “land use” AND “sustainable are actually embodied in more detailed and descriptive groups of keywords, thus, the
development”, as well as that of “sustainable” AND “trail” sustain the higher number of
correlation between the top 15 keywords (keyword titles) noted in Figure 4 and their com-
documents reported in the timespan of last four decades, followed by the other two fields
positional terms is represented in Table 1. The findings of Table 1 and Figure 4 also con-
of keywords “land use” AND “environment” AND “development”, “trail path” AND
firm the sporadically investigated field of keywords: “trail path” AND subcategory:
subcategory: “land”. This field of keywords has shown a rather recently emerging field of
“land”, comparing to the wider and systematically approached other three fields of key-
analysis, being also attributed to a shift in everyday living conditions of citizens worldwide
words: “land use” AND “sustainable development”; “sustainable” AND “trail”; “land
towards a healthier lifestyle and constant seeking for personal leisure activities in a clean
use” AND “environment” AND “development”. Therefore, environmental concerns and
and greener natural environment. Similarly, based on Figure 2 it was shown that countries sustainable development opportunities are common research objectives, compared to the
of either densely populated (western) economies, or wide spatial areas of management and
rather newly emerging fields of land use and trail paths, respectively.
development (such as that of African and emerging economies) are particularly interested in the joint fields of keywords “land use” AND “sustainable development”, as well as that of “sustainable” AND “trail”, followed by the field of keywords “land use” AND “environment” AND “development”. Contrarily, sporadic and sparsely investigated studies were reported in the field of keywords “trail path” AND subcategory: “land”, being mainly reported in Mediterranean European countries, such as Italy and Greece, being also vulnerable to the concurring economic and energy crises, as well as the COVID 19 pandemic. In Figures 3 and 4 the literature profiles of the retrieved documents per “Subject Area” and “Keyword” are also depicted.

Land 2023, 12, 1041
16 of 25
 It is noteworthy that, based on Figure 3, the top 10 subject areas of the most frequently- published documents can be grouped in the following 5 pairs (in descending order): (Envi- ronmental Science, Social-Decision Sciences) > (Engineering, Agricultural and Biological Sciences) > (Computer Science, Earth and Planetary Sciences) > (Economics Econometrics and Finance, Biochemistry Genetics and Molecular Biology) > (Multidisciplinary, Arts and Humanities). The most reported fields of environment, socio-economics, agriculture, earth-planetary-nature, and computer science can be attributed to the plethora/high num- ber of input data and modelling research specializations. Contrarily, the biological and humanitarian fields are sparsely and loosely related to the selected classifications of review- ing. Moreover, regarding the domain of “keyword” employed, Figure 4, it is noteworthy that the retrieved documents were highly dispersed in terms of definitions, terminologies, and research interests. Therefore, at an attempt to collect, to group and to organize this conceptually dispersed and heterogeneous material into homogeneous keywords, it was decided to keep traceable (for the scope of this review study) only the top 15 of them, in terms of all documents retrieved. This research practice enabled a more precise and concise representation, as shown in Figure 4 and Table 1, respectively.
Table 1. The keywords description of the top-15 keywords (in terms of frequency reported), regarding the four “fields of keywords” classified.
 Keyword #
1 2
3
4
5
6
7
8 9
10 11
12
13 14 15
Keyword Description
Land Use OR Land Cover/Change/Planning/Erosion OR Trail Sustainable(-ity)/Rural Development/and Economy
Geography/Geospatial/GIS/and Spatial Analysis Scale/Remote Sensing
Environment(s)al Areas/Assessment/Change/ Conditions/Effects/Factors/Legislation/Monitoring/Planning/ Protection/Temperature AND National Park/Trails/ Rural Roads/Trail Paths/Walking Paths
Agriculture/and Development/Land/and Alternative/Alpine/Cultural/Natural
Conservation OR Protection of Natural Resources/and Management
Coordinated Development OR Recreation(-al) Facility OR Tourism OR Cycling OR Leisure
Human(s) Activity OR Heritage Forest(s)
Hydrodynamic(s) Modelling/Characteristics OR Hydrology(ic)(al) Cycle(s)
Europe OR Eurasia/Asia
Water Accounting(s)/and Footprint/ Virtual Water/Management/Planning/Policy(-ies)/ Scarcity/Resource Management
Climate/and Change/Environment Development/Degree/Policy Carbon/and Dioxide/Sequestration/Footprint
Keyword Title
Land Sustainability
Spatial Geography
Environment
Agriculture
Conservation
Facilities and Toursim and Leisure Activities
Humans and Heritage Forestry
Hydrology Continental Europe OR Asia
Water
Climate Development Carbon
                Based on Table 1 and Figure 4 it can be noted that the top 15 keywords of Figure 4 are actually embodied in more detailed and descriptive groups of keywords, thus, the correlation between the top 15 keywords (keyword titles) noted in Figure 4 and their com- positional terms is represented in Table 1. The findings of Table 1 and Figure 4 also confirm the sporadically investigated field of keywords: “trail path” AND subcategory: “land”, comparing to the wider and systematically approached other three fields of keywords:

Land 2023, 12, 1041
17 of 25
 “land use” AND “sustainable development”; “sustainable” AND “trail”; “land use” AND “environment” AND “development”. Therefore, environmental concerns and sustainable development opportunities are common research objectives, compared to the rather newly
emerging fields of land use and trail paths, respectively.
In addition to the already developed literature overview and the representation
of results in Figures 1–4 and Table 1 above, it is also noteworthy that in addition to the fourth field of keywords, “sustainable” AND “trail”, was formulated another field of keywords (the fifth), that of “trail paths” AND “natural environment”. However, these combinations of keywords did not yield a measurable and significant number of studies, thus, it was decided that the fourth and the fifth field of keywords would only be descriptively presented in the “Discussion” section. In addition, based on the reported modeling approaches it can be argued that these approaches revealed issues that could link land-use and land-cover change (LULCC) as a causality of socio-economic and environmental domains that are of high priority especially among former rural spaces (of today urbanized characteristics) [106]. In such a way modeling approaches can keep a close connection with practical real-world examples of what, where and how environmental issues manifest especially among marginal areas. However, the predictive performance of such modeling should be considered low, due to uncertainty and lack of predictive variables that can properly capture the complex characteristics of local concentrations [107]. In response to these constraints there is an imperative need for using appropriate cross-validation schemes to estimate the predictive performance of the deployed models. In this context independent data selection in the step of model building can support a more precise understanding of the environment in the light of land uses, landscapes and urban development [107].
4. Discussion
Based on the source material collected and the documents retrieved from the Scopus database, this material has been categorized into the four domains and the four fields of keywords being grouped in two pairs of two domains each, shown in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. It can be stressed that while all selected classifications were organized in order to better demonstrate the retrieved documents and the logic behind the fields of keywords selected, it is also important to add that the critical point in this review study is not only to demonstrate the emerging classifications, but to stress the inten- sity of the reported documents, thus, arguing and concluding about those fields that should be prioritized as of utmost importance while detecting those challenging issues of future development and further investigation, nationally and globally. Therefore, the relevant calculated “intensity ratios”, as these are collectively shown at the bottom lines of Tables 2 and 3 disclose (a) significant new knowledge, (b) the current dynamics, (c) the evolution trends, and (d) the emerging fields of prioritization, being primarily noticeable in the ratio of (“land use” AND “sustainable development” [vs.] “land use” AND “environment” AND “development”), and secondarily in the ratio of (“sustain- able” AND “trail” [vs.] “trail path” AND subcategory: “land”). These ratios also reveal the pronounced role of literature—approaching and understanding the entities of sus- tainable development and, subsequently, the contribution of the trail paths into such a
“sustainable development” literature framework, Tables 2 and 3.

Land 2023, 12, 1041
2 Domains
4 fields of keywords
Total number of publications (documents)
Intensity ratios
2 Domains
4 fields of keywords
Total number of publications (documents)
Intensity ratios
18 of 25
Table 2. Intensity rations derived from the classification of the reported documents in alignment with the four “fields of keywords” and the first pair of domains “year; country/territory” classified.
   Year
“land use” AND “environment” AND “development”
25
Country/Territory
  “land use” AND “sustainable development”
131
“sustainable” AND
“trail” 41
“trail path” AND “land use” AND subcategory: “sustainable
“land” development” 9 88
“land use” AND “environment” AND “development”
22
“sustainable” AND
“trail” 28
“trail path” AND subcategory: “land”
7
   5.24
Table 3. Intensity rations derived from the classification of the reported documents in alignment with the four “fields of keywords” and the second pair of domains
 “subject area; keyword” classified.
4.56
“trail path” AND subcategory: “land”
4.00
“land use” AND “sustainable development”
4.00
“trail path” AND subcategory: “land”
   “land use” AND “sustainable development”
Subject Area
“land use” AND “environment” AND “development”
“sustainable” AND “trail”
Keyword
“land use” AND “environment” AND “development”
“sustainable” AND “trail”
  231 34 53 15 426 123 137 42
6.79 3.53 3.46 3.26
  
Land 2023, 12, 1041
19 of 25
 From historical times dating back centuries ago until recently, the area of fertile land has been very limited, making necessary the process of regulating land relations, as well as the adoption of land management systems and suitable strategic directions in the field of land use. In such a context, decisions should be taken in the future in order to contribute to the sustainable development of not only agro-industrial production, but also rural areas in general [108]. Considering the unity of all retrieved documents and the aforementioned analysis of them, it can be argued that the development of landscape routes to serve human passengers of transportation, walkers and hikers is not new but it has been chronologically seen dating back to the 1980s [109], and geographically dispersed in areas such as the Appalachian Mountains in eastern North America [110,111], South- Central New Mexico, US [112] and in Eastern (mainly mountainous) Europe [70]. In such a geographical context trail paths are inseparable assets of tourism development in which further preservation, protection, and promotion of the countryside, cultural heritage, and tradition, are achievable, while the provision of effective protection and management of areas of exceptional natural beauty and sensitive ecosystems with wildlife should be also undertaken. This valuable and multifaceted contribution of the trail paths to the protection and promotion of cultural customs of walking and the natural environment in general has been demonstrated, having the younger age group considered the most affectionate and positively appreciative towards the trail paths. Other human determinants of the promotion of trail paths are the exact type of activity serving as a leisure activity, especially whether the trail is pleasant and attractive or using the most easily accessible (hiking) routes for all locals and visitors [70].
Relevant key aspects of strategic planning and policy are that the landscape changes are commonly driven by major replacements of farmland by urban and rural settlements, artificial ponds, forested and constructed land. Industrialization, urbanization, agri- cultural structure adjustment, and rural housing construction are also determiners of driving forces of landscape changes [9]. Land management and environmental protec- tion policies can also support the transformation of the pastoral sector, pastoral land use and the concurring economics and financing, as in the case of post-socialist Mongolia. Such policies also reflect the influence of development economists from the Asian Devel- opment Bank who have been advising the Mongolian government, and their conviction that exclusive private rights to land are a necessary precondition of an efficient rural market economy [13]. While environmentalist agendas are important to reflect a familiar western interest in promoting western conservationist ideology to harbor wildlife and biodiversity, Mongolian practices are cast as “traditions” to be utilized for the greater goal of conservation as conceived of in western terms, rather than composing wider social and political institutions of land use [13].
These institutions of land use in real-world applications should consider a wide spec- trum of prerequisites such as the available planning systems; spatial, environmental, and water-management planning. The origins of these systems are not purely rural-oriented, but are also induced by urbanization and industrialization [10]. Therefore, new regional strategies have emerged to tackle this planning-designing problem of land uses, since these strategies can balance rural development and protection of the natural environment [10]. From a methodology point of view of such a multi-parametric approach the social media data should be seen as a resource that can complement, rather than replace, conventional data sources such as questionnaires and interviews. Furthermore, guidance should be provided on how social media could be effectively used by conservation bodies, such as in the case of Natural England, which are charged with the management of areas of environmental value worldwide [71].
It is also noteworthy that such pluralistic planning should also consider land use and natural environment services that are scientifically related to climate change mitigation [113,114], having also mapping and spatial analysis for climate change in Greece [115,116] and other Mediterranean areas [117,118]. It is also noticeable that, of generally applicably integrated studies, most synergies with environmentally-related

Land 2023, 12, 1041
20 of 25
 References
SDGs, such as water quality and biodiversity conservation, were observed when peren- nial crops had been produced on arable land, pasture or marginal land in the “cool temperate moist” climate zone and “high activity clay” soils, while most trade-offs were related to food security and water availability [119]. Previous land use and feedstock type were more impactful to develop synergies and trade-offs than climatic zone and soil type [119].
5. Conclusions, Concerns and Future Research Orientations
According to the conducted analysis and the derived findings, it is important to note that in land systems equitably managing trade-offs between planetary boundaries and hu- man development needs composes a grand challenge in sustainability-oriented initiatives. Informing such initiatives requires deep knowledge of the nexus between land use, poverty, and environment. In such an approach, human development and ethnicity should play a decisive role in land use not only in the natural environment, but also in other areas of human interest in the built environment. Indeed, ethnicity is strongly related to poverty in all land-use types almost independently of accessibility, implying that social distance outweighs geographical or physical distance. In turn, accessibility, almost a precondition for poverty alleviation, is of further benefit to ethnic majority groups and people living in paddy or permanent agriculture. These groups are able to translate improved accessibility into poverty alleviation and the overall land-use-poverty-environment nexus. In addition, effective development interventions can be guided by land change sciences, enabling a better integration and understanding of joint land-based indicators and process-based drivers towards land use change [20] and sustainable development [120].
Based on the review study, the classification of the retrieved documents into four fields of keywords was compared in two pairs of two fields of keywords each, while intensity ratios were also calculated, showing the primary noticeable ratios of (“land use” AND “sustainable development” [vs.] “land use” AND “environment” AND “de- velopment”), having intensity ratios at the first pair of domains “year; country/territory” in the range 4.00–5.24. In addition, the secondary noticeable ratios of (“sustainable” AND “trail” [vs.] “trail path” AND subcategory: “land”), supported intensity ratios at the second pair of domains “subject area; keyword” in the range 3.26–6.79. These ratios supported a better understanding of sustainable development entities and, consequently, the exact contribution of the trail paths into a “sustainable development” analysis.





The infrastructure age is upon us. Or at least that is the impression given as the task to address growing pressures brought forth by urbanization, under investment of social and public forms of infrastructure (e.g. social housing and public transport) and growing spatial inequality mounts. Big infrastructure projects are variously spruiked on the political stage, serving as lightening rods for community aspi- rations and frustrations. However alongside the mega-project national economic and security critical infrastructure politics and bluster lies the everyday nature of infrastructure that weaves its way ubiqui- tously through time, space and place. This is the taken for granted infrastructure that quietly co-exists in the form of digital technology, sewerage systems, energy, communications, global financial systems, food systems, housing, nature strips and urban tree programs etc. – until something goes wrong and human dependencies and vulnerabilities are painfully exposed.
Urban infrastructure, despite its pervasiveness and criticality, is an under-explored area of critical urban research, policy and practice. The study of infrastructure has been described by Star (1999, p. 376) as “mundane to the point of boring, involving things such as plugs, standards and bureaucratic forms”. In the Ethnography of Infrastructure she invokes an image of infrastructure as “frequently unexciting with lists of numbers and technical specifications, and hidden mechanisms subtending those processes more familiar to social scientists” (p. 377). It has been largely the purview of engineers and “big end of town” politics, as opposed to local scale community sovereignty and responsibility. Yet urban infrastructure shapes our cities socially, environmentally and politically. Infrastructure can divide communities and bring communities together; it can address one environmental concern and create a new one; it can be bought sold and co-owned. Urban infrastructure decisions may also affect different parts of the city to different degrees, which can result in varying patterns of socio‐spatial disadvantage and inequity. Whilst infrastructure can change urban landscapes, it is also shaped by and through the forces that act upon it.
Following Troy (1999, p. 1) this special issue seeks to address this by “focusing interest in and debate on” the critical urban infrastructure networks and rationalities that shape and define the city. Part of this agenda is around expanding our understanding of what constitutes critical urban infrastructure, which is far more than merely the sum of its physical parts. Whilst Troy’s emphasis was on urban institutions as opposed to critical infrastructure, the degree to which the two concepts are enmeshed and overlap is increasingly complex, if not always recognised or acted on. To this end the public and/ or private nature of infrastructure, its regulation by government intrumentalities, it’s relationality to other infrastructures, communities and institutions through interconnections and interdependencies are all a critical part of the contemporary infrastructure story that need to be better understood and communicated. Simultaneously both visible and invisible, the data, networks and technologies of critical urban infrastructure paradoxically inhabit the nexus of the polemic: being both mundane and the revolutionary; serving the esoteric and the necessity of the human condition.
In particular Troy (1999) lamented that at the end of the twentieth century there were few women who focused on urban ignitions/infrastructure and “this problem, this limitation” might one day be overcome with a greater number of female scholars and collaborators working in the area. This special issue is co-edited by two female urban scholars with backgrounds in planning, geography, literature
 © 2017 editorial board, Urban Policy and research
2 EDITORIAL
and philosophy, and a number of the contributing authors are women, alongside our male colleagues. We hope that this diversity of contribution and perspective helps to extend the lens through which we see infrastructure: as relational; ecological; as everyday practice; as inherently political; as embedded in questions of human and non-human justice and equity, fiscal transparency, institutional accountability; and with a particular emphasis on the critical role of infrastructure as part of a public urban commons.
Our collective ambition in this special issue is to reframe critical infrastructure as an interdisci- plinary agenda that offers important insights into the priorities, fetishes and organising systems and technologies of the age in a climate of change. In the words of Star (1999, p. 377): “to restore narrative to what appear to be just dead lists”. We focus here on two key themes that cut across the papers in this special issue: (1) the public good (which focuses on urban policy and planning manifestations of infrastructure); and (2) the infrastructure imagination (which attends to the conceptual, theoretical and methodological challenge and opportunity currently afforded us).
The public good
In the Australian city there has been a growing concern about the disconnect infrastructure planning and delivery has to strategic planning (Dodson 2009). In addition to the strategic planning “gap”, the delivery, procurement and ongoing management of urban infrastructure expose the extent to which infrastructure planning has been influenced and shaped by neoliberal forces in urban planning favoring market forces (O’Neill 2010). This is compounded by decision-makers privileging economic rationality as the foundation for urban infrastructure decision-making, rendering invisible social and environmental measures upon which decisions can better align with broader “public interest” goals (Campbell and Marshall 2000, 2002).
To address these concerns the creation of statutory infrastructure agencies foregrounds the crit- icality of urban infrastructure planning and delivery across Australian State and Commonwealth policy agendas. In Australia and since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) there has been a plethora of infrastructure oriented policy announcements by all tiers of government, but namely federal and state governments to build and maintain economic prosperity through the creation of jobs. Former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, when facing the threat of a recession following the GFC, in 2008 announced a stimulus package to fund “critical infrastructure” (Brisbane Times 2008). This was observed acutely through the introduction of the Social Housing Initiative as part of the Commonwealth Government’s two year $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan in 2009–2010 (Australian Government 2008). Perhaps also reflecting calls for further investment in critical social infrastructure such as affordable and social housing which had remained underfunded in recent years (Milligan and Pinnegar 2010), there has been an observable shift towards thinking about housing as infrastructure reflecting the job creating opportunities that arise (Maclennan et al. 2015, Pradolin 2016). In contrast to housing, public transport remains a second order priority to large-scale road building efforts in Victoria (East West Link, Western Distributor, North East Link), New South Wales (Westconnex) and Western Australia (Perth Freight Link) despite efforts to build light rail and expand heavy rail services in these states.
More recently, and as evidenced by the recent Commonwealth Smart City Plan, the centrality of economic benefit arising from infrastructure investments endures. Policy language continues to priv- ilege jobs creation, innovation and growing local and regional economies as the frame upon which infrastructure decisions and investment priorities are determined. Despite an ongoing focus on cost benefits, a shift to prioritising social and green infrastructure is evident in countries including Canada where the Federal government of Canada, under Justin Trudeau, announced $60 billion of infrastruc- ture over 10 years (including the promises made under the Conservative Harper government totalling $125 billion) to be spent on public transit, green infrastructure and social infrastructure (Hall 2016).
As Australian cities are challenged by mobility problems, including those related to access and accessibility (Curtis and Scheurer 2016), independent reports such as the Victorian Auditor-General’s (2013) continue to reveal the many ways in which Australian cities are becoming more inequitable.

And as the Australian city continues to physically expand, Dodson and Sipe (2008) argue the grow- ing vulnerability of those living in the outer suburban communities across metropolitan regions to fluctuations in oil pricing and availability, which is reinforced by a lack of alternative transport infra- structure. Concerned that the politics of infrastructure planning hampers efforts to deliver “needed” urban infrastructure in the areas of the city of greatest “need”, a call to depoliticize infrastructure planning and delivery fails to acknowledge that the very act of determining how scarce resources will be distributed across the city in the form of new infrastructure is inherently political: who decides how investments are distributed, the sequencing of delivery, the source of funding, not to mention the design, technology, management and ongoing operations can often form the basis upon which communities and local governments resist or welcome infrastructure investments.
Beyond government policy, unsolicited and market-led proposals, which are punctuating urban infrastructure debates, are raising important questions about the role of the market and strategic planning in steering investment proposals, and how the governance of these kinds of proposals might come to be. Critical engagement with the recently announced Consolidated Land and Rail Australia (CLARA) proposal to build a high-speed rail project to activate land development and employment creation along its corridor, exposes ongoing fractures between strategic planning and infrastructure building. CLARA currently provides yet another example of market encroachment onto the strategic and public planning of Australian cities and landscapes. Much of the arguments against the CLARA proposal focus on the economic viability over and above its social and environmental benefits as Australian capital cities in the east struggle to accommodate growth in population and the restruc- turing of their economies. Transport experts warn that this plan is nothing more than a “property development idea”. But this project also renders visible the challenges besetting governance oversight and strategic engagement with infrastructure planning and raises interesting questions not only about what types of infrastructure (e.g. housing, IT, transport, etc.) and technologies (e.g. buses versus light rail) ought to be considered critical or not, but also highlights the social and political processes upon which criticality is claimed, and who is driving these processes.
The infrastructure imagination
How we conceive of urban infrastructure is critically important to the ways in which it will ultimately be framed, accepted and understood within the broader community. Critical infrastructure as a mul- tidimensional and lived phenomenon is as much about space, place, ecology and culture, as it is about pipes, scaffolding, wire and concrete. As Graham and Marvin (2001) highlight, infrastructure systems enable the circulation of knowledge, meaning and power, as well as facilitate the mobility of people and goods. To this end new ways of conceptualising critical urban infrastructure need to be embedded within the interdisciplinary work that is beginning to take place. As O’Neill (2010, p. 1) observes critical urban infrastructure requires “new thinking and approaches in the twenty-first century”.
In particular insights from political ecology, socio-technical studies, critical geography and anthropology have helped to broaden the infrastructure imagination and conditions of possibility. Anthropologist Star (1999, p. 381) for example, defines the critical features of urban infrastructure as:
• Embedded – infrastructure is sunk into and inside of other structures, social arrangements, and technologies.
• Transparent (and largely invisible) – infrastructure once established, reappears only at moments of upheaval or breakdown.
• Defined by its reach – infrastructure extends beyond particular spatial or temporal locations.
• Learned – infrastructure becomes taken-for granted as a part of membership within particular
professional, social, or cultural communities.
• Deeply linked with conventions of practice – infrastructure both shapes and is shaped with other
forms of routinized social action.
URBAN POLICY AND RESEARCH 3

4 EDITORIAL
• Built on, shaped and constrained by its relationship to an already installed base.
• Fixed and changed in modular increments infrastructure shifts through complex processes of
negotiation and mutual adjustment with adjacent systems, structures, and practices.
For social scientists infrastructure can be understood as a sociopolitical agenda focused on institutional relations and historical concentrations of power, control and access. As Dourish and Bell (2007, p. 415) highlight this involves both: (1) the practical organisation of space – how spatial arrangements provide an infrastructure for the ongoing achievement of concerted action; and (2) the cultural organisation of space – how the organisation of space becomes an infrastructure for the collective production and enactment of cultural meaning. They describe this as the infrastructure of experience which focuses
not so much on the ways in which infrastructures reflect institutional relationships and more on how they shape individual actions and experience ... the ways in which infrastructure, rather than being hidden from view, becomes visible through our increasing dependence upon it for the practice of everyday life. (p. 416)
Their focus was to:
... draw attention to the ways in which, in turn, the embedding of a range of infrastructures into everyday space shapes our experience of that space and provides a framework through which our encounters with space take on meaning. The experiential reading of infrastructure, then, sees infrastructure and everyday life as coextensive; accordingly, it encompasses not just technological but also the social and the cultural structures of experience (Dourish and Bell 2007, p. 417).
More recently Graham and McFarlane (2015) in their book Infrastructural Lives emphasise the impor- tance of everyday infrastructure in context. They argue that the everyday is significant for it is “both a key domain through which practices are regulated and normalised, as well as an arena for negotia- tion, resistance and points of difference” (p. 2). To this end they point to four key guiding themes for re-engaging the critical infrastructure imagination in research, planning and policy:
(1) Knowing infrastructure – understanding the relations between infrastructure and urban life.
(2) Being excluded from infrastructure – understanding violence and dispossession.
(3) Producing and managing infrastructure – understanding processes of normalisation.
(4) Experimenting with infrastructure – understanding the creative process of infrastructure.
This special issue works across these critical vectors to focus attention on critical urban infrastructure as a contemporary urban research, policy and planning agenda. What’s critical about critical infrastruc- ture is the driving question in the conceptual article offered by Wendy Steele, Karen Hussey and Stephen Dovers. In particular they highlight the shifting nature of criticality within urban infrastructure and argue that what is critical in urban infrastructure regimes is not just recognition of their vulnerability and interconnectedness, but the key linkages between critical infrastructure and human and environ- mental systems integrity and equity. Crystal Legacy picks up the theme of urgency and explores how it can be used to support subversions to the governance of infrastructure planning. Drawing attention to the political, institutional and economic context that infrastructure planning is embedded within the paper raises questions about how contextual frames reproduce certain rationalities and motivations, over other frames that might inspire more just and ecologically centered responses.
With a critical focus on digital infrastructure and urban governance Sarah Barns, Ellie Cosgrove, Michele Acuto and Donald McNeill highlight the contested politics of the “smart city” with reference to international developments. In particular the article draws attention to the digital infrastructures that underpin the urban polity, the impact of this digital infrastructure on the strategic agendas set out by local governments and the role of global technology providers in shaping the urban governance agenda around digital policy. Pierre Filion and Roger Keil extend this international lens to the global urban periphery with their focus on the political economy, political ecology and politics of suburban infrastructures. To this end they focus on the politics of suburban infrastructures and argue that sub- urbs provide both: (1) an ideal object of study to identify infrastructure shortcomings in the urban age: and (2) are a key source of emergent infrastructure innovation.

Managing the private financing of urban infrastructure is the theme of the article by Phillip O’Neill who critically examines the intersection of private finance and the delivery and operation of urban infrastructure. The shift to private infrastructure financing for urban planning in the ownership and control of Australia’s urban infrastructure is highlighted, as is the concomitant impact on the economic directions of Australia’s major cities and resulting political, social and environmental consequences is explored. This theme is developed in the article by Crystal legacy, Carey Curtis and Jan Scheurer focused on how the politics of infrastructure planning is performed in and mediated by neoliberal planning settings. The paper challenges conventional decision-making structures shaping transport planning by offering three contemporary illustrations of how these structures and governance settings can inspire conflict and spur politicization, which is enacted in different ways by disparate community and state actors in the city. The issue concludes with a Practice Review by Jago Dodson. Expanding on his earlier work exploring Australia’s “infrastructure turn”, in this piece Jago draws our attention to the global reach of this turn and also challenges us to give fuller attention to the practices of infrastructure planning. Casting a conceptual and analytical lens, Dodson argues that examining discourse, instru- mentality and the politics of infrastructure is central to understanding the complexity of infrastructure processes and how these processes are shaping the twenty-first Century City.
As you will see from this special issue there is nothing boring, inherently masculine or excluding of the broader remit of the critical social sciences intrinsic to the notion of critical infrastructure as we have presented it. On the contrary it is a vital interdisciplinary arena that warrants greater attention by scholars and practitioners in urban research, policy and planning. Whilst twentieth century criti- cal infrastructure research was overwhelmingly undertaken by engineers and developers (often with commercial in-confidence prohibitions to accessing the research), the next generation of infrastructure research and practice will be markedly different. Disciplines such as urban studies, geography, soci- ology, philosophy, socio-technical studies, economics, cultural geography enrich our understanding of infrastructure as complex, relational and political; as networks, systems and date, but also the everyday spaces and places that shape and are shaped by the cities and regions that inhabit and/ or use them. Building the infrastructure imagination and its capacity for public good is a key urban policy and research agenda for the twenty-first century – rich with new conceptual understandings and practical approaches.



Infrastructure is fundamentally concerned with the provision of connectivity and energy. In the
OECD the problems posed by infrastructure investment have necessarily been surmounted: large
investments in both types of infrastructure have enabled firms to be productive. Provision has
been partly through public investment financed by taxation and public debt, and partly through
private investment facilitated and circumscribed by regulation. In contrast, in most poor
countries such infrastructure is grossly inadequate. Economic activities are disconnected from
each other and from global markets, while energy is mispriced and underprovided. This
inadequacy reflects a failure in both the public and the private means of provision.
The scope for private provision differs considerably between the various types of infrastructure.
As demonstrated by prevailing practice in the OECD, the investments necessary for energy are
potentially financeable entirely through the private sector. In contrast, much of the infrastructure
needed for connectivity is best provided publicly. Some (such as roads) are public goods, use of
which may be non-rival and access to which may be non-excludable. Many of the investments
are ‘lumpy’, implying non-marginal changes and hence the creation of economic surplus that is
not captured by suppliers. Some are responses to negative externalities (addressing congestion
or sanitation in dense urban areas) and others, we suggest below, support positive externalities of
agglomeration.
In this short paper we cannot be comprehensive. Since the policies for attracting private finance
for infrastructure in developing countries have recently been reviewed in this journal (Estache et
al. 2015), we focus on connectivity rather than energy, while to illustrate the order of magnitude
of the infrastructure challenge, we focus on Africa (SSA). This is the region with the largest
infrastructure deficit, and annual spending needs that have been estimated at around $90bn pa,
amounting to 15% of African GDP or $120 per capita each year, while actual spending is
running at less than 2/3rds of this (Foster and Briceno-Garmendia 2010). Although the largest
single component of this is power, connectivity needs are also very large, amounting to around
5% of GDP per annum (see table 1). One component of the infrastructure for connectivity is
inter-urban, connecting economic activity across cities and to ports. However, it is urban areas
that will see the largest needs, since the number of Africans living in cities is predicted to triple
over the next 30 years. We therefore focus on the urban context, with some discussion of
national transport issues towards the end of the paper.
The next section of the paper gives some background on African infrastructure, and section 3
lays out the arguments for the value of connectivity and the role of infrastructure in supporting
that connectivity. We argue that the value of infrastructure goes well beyond the ‘user-benefits’
of standard cost-benefit appraisal as it supports an economic environment in which the economic
potential of cities – scale, specialisation, and agglomeration economies – can be achieved.
3
Section 4 turns to the policies that are required to support infrastructure investment, looking at
public finance, governance, urban density, and turning finally to the wider national context.
Table 1: Overall infrastructure spending needs for Africa, 2006-15. $billion per annum.
Capital
expenditure
Operation and
maintenance
Total needs
Transport 8.8 9.4 18.2
ICT 7.0 2.0 9.0
Water supply and sanitation 14.9 7.0 21.9
Power 26.7 14.1 40.8
Total 57.7 32.4 90.0
Source: Foster and Briceno-Garmendia 2010, Table 1.13
2. Africa: cities and infrastructure
The Africa infrastructure deficit needs to be seen in the context of Africa’s capital scarcity. In
particular, African cities are chronically short of built capital of all sorts – in the stock of
housing, in structures devoted to commercial and industrial use, and in the form of public
infrastructure.
Up to 80% of the population in many cities live in informal housing.1 This is likely to take the
form of single storey shacks, with only limited access to water, sanitation and to electric power.
The settlement may be illegal (breaching building and other land use regulations) and tenure may
be insecure. Co-existing with this informality are modern houses, often quite large and serving
the elite. The striking gap is in the middle: the provision of formal sector decent quality low-
income housing is largely absent in many cities.
Informality is also prevalent in employment, with around 60% of urban employment taking the
form of casual labour and activities such as street trade. Of formal sector employment, much (at
least in the capital city) is in the public sector. Private sector activity is oriented to production of
non-tradables, generally taking place in very small firms. Again, there is a striking gap: the
formal sector employment in the industrial sector that drove much urbanisation in Europe and in
Asia is largely missing.
1 UN-Habitat (2015) estimate that 62% of Africa’s urban population lives in slums, with the number exceeding 90%
in some countries.
4
Turning to infrastructure, the provision of public services – ranging from health and education
through to water supply and sanitation is generally weak, although better in urban areas than
rural. The inadequacy of power supply is widely documented; whereas Africa had three times
more generating capacity per person than South Asia in 1970, it now has just half as much
(Foster and Briceno-Garmendia 2010). Infrastructure for connectivity will be our focus for the
most of this chapter, and the picture is again one of severe under-investment. The density of
paved roads in SSA is less than one quarter of that in other low income regions (Foster and
Briceno-Garmendia 2010). Within cities, roads are inadequate. For example, roads constitute
only around 10 percent of the land area of several large African cities, whereas in a well-
connected large city the figure would be around 30 percent. Freetown is an extreme instance:
during a period of state breakdown the city’s population grew to over a million as a result of
violent disorder in rural areas, but still has little more than the colonial road network designed for
a town of 35,000. As a consequence the few roads become highly congested as private users of
cars ignore the negative externalities they generate. Crucially, these externalities are not just on
other car users, but on buses.
Our central argument is that there are complementarities between these types of investment –
residential and commercial, private and public. These complementarities create vicious circles,
and the possibility of becoming mired in a low level trap. Infrastructure has a key role to play in
breaking out of this trap. We explore the mechanisms through which this can happen in the next
section, and policy responses in section 4.
3. Connectivity, infrastructure and urban economic performance
What is the social value of an infrastructure investment, such as a road or public transport
improvement? The direct value is the sum of ‘user benefits’ created, i.e. the better quality or
lower cost service provided to users. Thus, a transport improvement will reduce the generalised
transport cost of existing users of the network and also attract (and bring benefit to) new users.
Quantification of this is the stuff of standard cost benefit analysis but, we will argue, this
significantly under-estimates the value of large scale infrastructure investment, particularly in the
urban context.
Cities are, potentially, high productivity areas and drivers of economic growth. The spatial
configuration of economic activity in the city is fundamentally dependent on infrastructure, as
the investment decisions of firms and households respond to the transport network. Thus, it is
hard to imagine London without the underground system, providing 4 million journeys each day
and supporting employment densities in central areas in excess of 150,000 workers per square
kilometre. While it is evident that infrastructure shapes the city, does this create value over and
above the user-benefits of cost-benefit appraisal? In a ‘perfect’ economy the answer is no: all
activities are operating at the scale where marginal benefit equals marginal cost, so any induced
5
change in these activities yields no net value. But cities are far from ‘perfect’ economies. There
are myriad non-market interactions, fundamentally the positive one of intense economic
interaction, bringing with it agglomeration economies and higher productivity. These
interactions work because a high degree of connectivity in the city enables scale and
specialization, and the acquisition and transfer of knowledge and skills. This is partly a matter of
transport infrastructure (being able to bring 150,000 workers into each square kilometre of the
central business district), but also of the wider fabric of the city. High density residential and
well-located employment centres support connectivity while economising on transport.
To explore these issues requires a model of economic activity in the city as a whole, and of the
determinants of urban economic performance. The conceptual framework we work with is to
think of a city’s economic performance as the outcome of a trade-off between two forces. One is
that cities have high productivity, typically offering higher wages than surrounding areas. This is
due, in part at least, to the connectivity offered by cities. The other is that cities are high cost –
the costs of commuting and congestion, and of high land values and property prices.2 What
underlies these productivity and cost effects, and how are they shaped by infrastructure?
3.1 Infrastructure and urban costs
Poor infrastructure raises the cost of doing business in a city. The consequences of poor power
supply are widely documented, and frequently reported by firms to be the major obstacle to
growth (Foster and Briceno-Garmendia 2010). The impact of poor road networks and port
quality are also cited as major barriers to doing business.3
In addition to the direct effect of poor infrastructure on firms’ costs, it has an impact on the well-
being of urban residents, and thence on the attractiveness of the city to migrants from rural areas.
The possibility of such migration creates a link between the real incomes of urban dwellers and
rural households.4 It follows that, if the cost of living in urban areas is high, then nominal wages
in urban areas will be correspondingly high. More generally, urban costs can be thought of as a
package of the cost of goods and services, together with disutility from poor housing, poor
service provision, low quality infrastructure, congestion, and time spent in long commutes to
work. Such costs mean that urban wages will have to be relatively high to compensate. Thus,
urban areas may have a configuration of low real incomes for workers (set by the supply price of
labour from rural areas), but high costs of labour for firms, paying high nominal wages to offset
these urban costs. This is a further drag on the competitiveness of firms.
2 This is captured formally in the standard Alonso-Mills-Muth urban model, see e.g. Glaeser (2008).
3 Although Teravaninthorn and Raballand (2009) also point to the importance of restrictive practises in raising the
cost of transport services.
4 Although does not necessarily equate them.
6
Evidence suggests that this configuration is quite common in African cities. Wages are
relatively high (some 15% higher than in comparable cities elsewhere, at official exchange rates,
according to Jones, 2016), but so too is the cost of living. Harati and Nakamura (2016) estimate
that the cost of living in African cities is around 20% higher than cities elsewhere (after
controlling for city size, per capita incomes and growth). This is largely due to high housing
costs (77% more expensive than in other cities at comparable levels of economic development).
Food prices are also high, partly due to wastage and poor food distribution, a corollary of poor
infrastructure. This configuration of prices and wages creates a business environment in which
firms can survive supplying non-tradable goods to the local market, but are unable to compete in
international markets unless there are offsetting productivity advantages.
A major determinant of urban costs is the efficiency with which the city uses land – its ultimate
scarce resource. Efficient land use requires that investors (households and firms) have the
confidence to sink capital in constructing long-lived structures. Many factors shape these
decisions, and we discuss some of the institutional and governance issues in section 4.
Infrastructure evidently plays a direct role. Better transport links create ‘user-benefits’,
improving accessibility to work or amenities and thereby increasing land values and encouraging
high density development (e.g. building tall), in order to maximise the return on more expensive
land.
In addition to these direct benefits, infrastructure plays an important role in shaping and
coordinating expectations about future development. In many circumstances private sector
investment is deterred by coordination failure, arising because the profitability of one investment
project depends positively on another. It is then not in the interest of any single investor to
invest, although each would invest if they knew that others were going to do so. Coordination
failures thus lead to low level traps and require some policy mechanism to coordinate individual
actions and break out of the trap. A key step in overcoming such a trap is to generate common
knowledge of intentions to invest, this being knowledge that is not only widely shared but that is
known to be widely shared (Thomas et al. 2014). Infrastructure investment can be such a
mechanism for generating common knowledge.
A simple example of this is a growing city in which it is clear to all that a secondary centre
somewhere on the edge of the city will be successful, but there is no agreement as to exactly
where. The expected return to a private investment in any particular place is therefore low or
negative, since this may not turn out to be the place that takes-off. This uncertainty creates the
low level trap – no-one invests anywhere. There are different ways to resolve this problem. A
sufficiently large private developer could move first, being relatively confident of being followed
by other investors. The city authorities can produce an urban plan, selecting areas for
development. Or infrastructure can be built. This now has a dual function; it delivers access and
user-benefits and is also a credible signal that a particular place will develop. If this resolves the
7
coordination failure then the return to the investment can, potentially, be many times greater than
the user-benefits alone. This argument applies to transport infrastructure, and also to investment
in other services and utilities, such as power supply and water and sanitation.
3.2 Infrastructure and urban productivity
The other side of the urban trade-off is high productivity, derived from agglomeration
economies. The sources and evidence on agglomeration economies are widely discussed, and so
our review is brief. Probably the most important mechanism is that urban connectivity creates an
environment where firms and workers can become specialised and reach an efficient scale of
operation. The density of customers is large enough that firms can achieve scale, and ease of
communication between customers and suppliers makes for product quality and tailored design.
Many of the goods and services supplied are intermediates – the specialist components and
workers (engineers, lawyers, finance experts) who will raise efficiency in the firms that are their
clients. This creates a process of cumulative causation. A new supplier will set up once the
market is big enough, and the presence of the new supplier will make the cluster more attractive
for firms that use the product or service; this in turn grows the market for specialist suppliers,
encouraging further entry. This is the classic process of cluster formation, such as an auto-
industry cluster of assemblers and suppliers or a film industry cluster of directors, actors and
technicians. There are spillover effects (externalities) in this process. Indivisibilities or
increasing returns to scale mean that a service, skill, or product will only be supplied if the
market is big enough. The supplier is generally unable to capture all of the benefit, so there is a
positive net effect accruing to others in the cluster.
Further mechanisms reinforce this cluster effect. Competition is likely to be intense in a large
and dense cluster so monopolistic pockets of inefficiency are less likely to survive.
Monopsonistic behaviour, occurring where there are few potential purchasers for a product or
skill, can deter investment; this too is less likely to be a problem in a large and dense cluster.
There may be direct knowledge spillovers between firms, as ‘mysteries of the trade become no
mysteries; but are as it were in the air’ (Marshall 1890). Each of these mechanisms may operate
within particular sectors or across a wide range of sectors, the former being referred to as
localisation (or Marshallian) economies, and the latter as urbanisation (or Jacob) economies.
Within-sector productivity effects create a force for sectorally specialised clusters and possibly
specialised cities. This is important in some manufacturing sectors; developed country
manufacturing exhibits automotive clusters, and developing country manufacturing contains
clusters in labour intensive sectors such as textiles and garments. Clustering is particularly
prevalent in business services such as finance, law, and media. Both the creation and diffusion of
knowledge work particularly well in clusters, and a large body of literature points to the spatial
concentration of innovative activities.
8
The magnitude of these agglomeration effects has been extensively researched, although largely
in developed economies. A reasonable consensus has emerged on the magnitude of effects. An
authoritative (although quite old) survey of the literature finds that ‘in sum, doubling city size
seems to increase productivity by an amount that ranges from roughly 3-8%’ (Rosenthal and
Strange 2004). This implies that the elasticity of productivity with respect to city size is in the
range 0.05- 0.11. 5 This is a large effect in the cross-section, suggesting that productivity in a
city of 5 million is between 12% and 26% higher than in a city of ½ million. A meta-study
(Melo et al. 2009) suggested that the mean estimate of this elasticity across several hundred
studies is somewhat lower, at 0.03, although finding considerable variation according to sector,
country, and technique employed by researchers. Recent work using individual data (and
controlling for individual effects) produces estimates of similar magnitude. At the sectoral level,
there is evidence of heterogeneity, with business services and high technology sectors exhibiting
the largest localisation economies.
The critical point about these mechanisms is that they all depend on connectivity – the ability of
firms to connect with many customers and suppliers and draw on large pools of workers. Good
transport infrastructure enables a city to achieve connectivity, and does so in two distinct ways.
One is that, given the levels and location of employment, intra-city connectivity is enhanced so
that firms are able to communicate with each other, and workers can get to jobs. The other is
that, since the location becomes a more attractive destination for investment, the overall scale of
the city, and any clusters within it, will be larger. A positive feedback applies, as higher levels of
activity raise productivity, making the city a still more attractive place to do business. 6
3.3 Outcomes
The arguments above suggest that urban infrastructure brings down costs faced by firms, making
the city a more attractive place for inwards investment. Furthermore, infrastructure that
increases connectivity enables scale and specialisation and so raises productivity. In the absence
of good transport infrastructure complex economic activity is not possible as communication
between firms gets obstructed and individuals cannot get to work in concentrated areas of
employment. In consequence, a city that lacks connectivity cannot achieve agglomeration
benefits or generate high-productivity jobs.
The forces we have described can generate cumulative causation process and multiple equilibria,
some desirable, others highly dysfunctional.7 The virtuous circle is that infrastructure investment
and other policies bring down urban costs and raise and coordinate expectations; investment
5 Elasticities are therefore in the range 0.05-0.1 since 20.05 =1.03 and 20.11 = 1.08.
6 This is recognised in transport appraisal in some countries (including the UK), which factors in ‘wider economic
benefits’ that are generated by the density, scale, and productivity enhancing effects of transport improvements.
7 See Venables (2016b) for formal development of this argument.
9
follows, this bringing agglomeration economies and raising productivity; in turn, this raises
income and land values, providing the tax base to fund the infrastructure (to be discussed further
in the next section). The vicious circle is the converse of this, with the low infrastructure, high
cost, low employment outcome that we described earlier.
The consequence is very divergent performance of developing cities around the world. Many
Asian cities – in East Asia, and increasingly now South Asia – have been able to attract and grow
the sectors that are prone to agglomeration economies. In contrast, most African cities are
‘artisanal cities’, characterised by low levels of investment in infrastructure and low levels of
residential and business investment. Such cities have inefficient land use, lacking density and so
further impeding connectivity. They are relatively high cost and low productivity, making them
unattractive locations for internationally mobile investment in tradable sectors, as a consequence
of which that they fail to achieve agglomeration and urbanisation economies. This is apparent in
the evidence on industrial composition. The share of manufacturing in African countries as a
whole is low, and there is some evidence pointing directly to the share of tradable activities in
urban areas. For example, looking just at firms with more than 20 employees, less than 50% of
employment in Dar es Salaam, Kampala, Kigali and Lusaka is in tradable activities, while in a
sample of similar size Indian cities, the figure is more than 80% (Jones 2016).
4. Policies for the Infrastructure of Connectivity
The previous section indicates that improvements in connectivity need to be evaluated in terms
of their city-wide impact, and may have benefits over and above the user-benefits of standard
cost benefit analysis. This evaluation poses technical challenges, although methodologies exist
for quantifying some effects. For example, the appraisal methodology in England and Wales
quantifies ‘wider economic benefits’ accruing from agglomeration and from land-use change.8
In developing economies the policy challenge is wider. We begin with two key sets of policies
that shape urban connectivity: the generation of public revenues to finance investments in urban
infrastructure and the promotion of investment in housing sufficient to enable high levels of
urban density. We then turn to the meta-policy of creating an authorizing environment for cities
that is conducive to these policies. Finally, we set out the scope for linking resource extraction to
the provision of national connectivity.
4.1 Infrastructure and urban public finance
8 These are reviewed in Venables (2016a). For details see Department for Transport (2013) and for principles see
Venables (2007).
10
How is urban infrastructure to be financed? As we saw, the scale of expenditure is daunting,
often amounting to 10-20% of urban GVA. However, economic principles and the experience of
some cities indicate that there is a readily available tax base that can yield sufficient revenue to
meet these expenditures: land values.
Land values have many advantages as a tax base, as noted by economists back to Ricardo and
popularised in the writings of Henry George and his followers. The appreciation in value of a
particular piece of urban land is not due to the actions of the land-owner, but due to its location
in the city and thence the collective activity of the city including provision of urban
infrastructure. The equilibrium response of land prices to a transport investment will generally
mean that ‘user-benefits’ end up being passed from transport users to landowners. For example,
a new subway station makes nearby houses more desirable so rents will increase. In the simplest
cases (either a perfectly elastic demand curve for housing or a perfectly inelastic supply of
housing in each place) all of the ‘user-benefit’ of the improvement is bid away by higher rents,
which are in turn capitalised in higher land values.
This has two implications. First, taxation of land values is non-distortionary. Land is in fixed
supply, immobile, and earns pure economic rent, so taxing it does not distort economic decisions
and induces no micro-economic inefficiency. Second, it is ethically well-grounded, since the
land-owner has no moral claim to have earned the appreciation in value. The appreciation is due
to collective action in the city, making a case for returning it to the city to finance collective
urban spending.
Furthermore, urban land value is usually sufficient to finance all the public goods needed in an
efficient city. Arguments making this point are sometimes referred to as ‘Henry George
theorems’ and come in several forms. 9 In a developing country context the basic idea is simple.
If the city draws in workers from outside at some exogenously given rural wage, then the entire
economic surplus created by the city accrues to its scarce factor, land. Since it cannot be
efficient to invest more in infrastructure than the total surplus it creates, tax at some rate less than
100% is sufficient to finance all infrastructure needs.
However, an important issue concerns the mismatch between the timing of expenditure on
infrastructure and that of the generation of tax revenues. Many infrastructure investments have to
be made as a city is growing and are prohibitively expensive to retrofit, but revenue from a
continuing tax on land value accrues over the entire life of the city. Some of these future tax
revenues therefore need to be capitalised to finance up-front investments. This is easy if the state
(or the city) initially owns the land and can sell it for development as the city grows. Thus, land
in Hong Kong was owned by the crown (i.e. the UK government) and sale of crown lands
9 See Arnott and Stiglitz (1979) for a formal statement of Henry George theorems.
11
financed the development of the city. Chinese cities have been able to finance growth (and, in
some cases excessive infrastructure spending) by selling land to developers (World Bank 2014).
In Africa, however, urban land is seldom publicly owned so that investment in infrastructure
requires borrowing. This need not be problematic as long as the urban tax base is built to provide
future tax revenues as implicit collateral, although in practise this has not been credibly pursued.
In addition to raising revenue, land value taxation also has the effect of reducing the costs of land
purchase required for infrastructure investment. Due to the lack of public ownership and the
political power of landowners, land that has to be acquired will typically be bought at market
valuation. Whereas in the OECD compensation for compulsory purchase is conventionally made
at values prior to the announcement of infrastructure development, in Africa courts commonly
set it simply at prevailing market prices. Further, since many African urban infrastructure
projects are partially funded by aid, donor concerns for respecting human rights require a right of
appeal to the courts. Hence, the more socially valuable the infrastructure, the more costly it will
be to install. Market values are further inflated, partly because land is untaxed, and partly
because the recorded transactions on which court valuations are based is for land which has
uncontested rights of ownership and vacant possession and this is scarce.
Administratively, a tax on land value is relatively undemanding. The start is to gather data on the
price at which land is being transacted, and to use this to map the city into zones according to
bands of land prices. For example, the central business district (CBD), would be the highest-
price zone. The next step is to build a cadastre delineating plots linked to a public register
showing all the claims of ownership of these plots. In many cities ownership is contested but this
need not impede building a register: on the contrary, it makes one even more useful. By
promulgating a simple law that sets a date by which all claims to urban land must be registered in
order to be considered valid, a register would both flush out and limit the extent of land disputes.
Further, a land tax can be designed so as to create an incentive for dispute resolution. Each
claimant to a plot can be made liable for the full tax on the plot, so that the parties to a dispute
can reduce their combined tax bill be settling it.
Constructing such a register brings with it other benefits, most notably enabling property
transactions and the use of land as collateral. The tax is best levied simply on the annual
ownership of land, rather than on either the property built on it, or transactions. Taxing property
discourages investment in structures, and taxing transactions discourages changes of land use,
both of which would be distorting. In contrast, an annual tax on land ownership encourages
owners of underutilised land to sell it to those who could use it more productively.
4.2 Infrastructure and residential density
Density is a substitute for transport infrastructure in generating urban connectivity. Achieving
connectivity in a sprawling city requires a massive road network, but a dense city can get away
12
with a much smaller and cheaper network. Further, density enables advanced high capacity
transport technologies which support the very high levels of connectivity common in major cities
of the OECD. Technologies such as Bus Rapid Transit, Light Rail and Metros become viable
only if there is sufficient density of passengers. Hence, density, both residential and commercial,
is a public good.
Table 2: Capital costs per capita of infrastructure provision, by density. $ per capita
Source, Foster and Briceno-Garmendia 2010, Table 5.6
The magnitude of savings in the cost of infrastructure that density permits is indicated in table 2.
Per capita costs of providing the package of infrastructure measures given in the table decline
strongly with the density of settlement: capital costs per capita vary from nearly $5,000 in deeply
13
rural areas, to only $325 at very high urban density. While sanitation infrastructure has constant
returns, the cost of transport is best approximated by land area served, so falls in inverse
proportion to population density.10
Currently, African settlement is characterized by very low density: over half the population is
rural. Fortunately, rapid urbanization is increasing the population-weighted national density of
settlement. However, offsetting this, within cities density is low. Cities are growing through
sprawl because people live overwhelmingly in single-storey informal housing. The infrastructure
capex cost to accommodate these new urban residents is consequently acutely sensitive to the
density at which urbanization occurs. With Africa’s urban population growing at around 15mn
people per annum, the cost implications of different urban densities are huge, ranging from
$15bn pa at the density currently typical of secondary cities, down to around $5bn pa at the
highest densities. Hence, cost effectiveness implies prioritizing urban infrastructure to facilitate
rapid urbanization, and within urban areas encouraging higher density.
These factors suggest that a key element of infrastructure policy is pursuit of a wider package of
policies to increase the density of settlement in African cities. 11 Africa’s cities have low density
primarily because residential structures are predominantly single-storey shacks. This is the
consequence of policy failure surrounding three key issues which we consider in turn.
Affordability
Affordability can only be assessed relative to income. Quite what this implies for a viable
purchase cost depends upon the real interest rate and the terms of financing, but a likely ceiling
for low-cost housing is around $15,000 including the price of land. The unit costs of house
construction depend partly upon building standards, partly upon costs of inputs, and partly upon
the organization of the construction industry.
All cities need building standards and it is appropriate for standards to anticipate rising income.
However, it is also important to anticipate the need for rising density. If the regulation of
building standards is appropriate, they provide a mental shorthand reducing decision costs.
However, in 1947 Britain substantially raised standards (the Parker-Morris standards) and
implemented them across the Empire. Hence, upon Independence African governments inherited
10 For comparison, large S. Asian cities have densities in excess of 20,000 people per km2, Lagos has 14,000 and
typical African capital cities in the range 5-8,000, similar to London at 6,000 (Demographia 2015).
11 This section draws on Collier and Venables (2015)
14
regulations that were inappropriate for the level of income. For example, in Nairobi the
minimum legal plot size is 1/16th of an acre, which is unaffordable for ordinary households. Not
only were these not revised downwards, they conveyed the impression to African regulatory
authorities that modernization would require standards to be raised from time to time. Hence, for
example, in Dar es Salaam the minimum size of plot is 500m2, but the authorities are discussing
whether to raise it to 700m2. How out of line were the British standards of the 1947 for the level
of African incomes? In purchasing power parity terms African per capita income is less than one
20th of British incomes as of 1970. Evidently, these standards will not become appropriate until
long after the housing has been replaced. The consequence of unaffordability was inevitably that
housing construction has bifurcated, with regulations being ignored in the informal market that
caters for ordinary households. But informality brings other costs. Designs are idiosyncratic and
foundations unobservable, and so properties are hard to value. Being hard to value impedes the
resale market, and its use as collateral.
Poor regulation has also added to the cost of material inputs such as cement, which in Africa is
typically around three times the world price. Importation and domestic supply have been subject
to local monopoly. For example, Aliko Dangote, the richest individual in Africa with a fortune
estimated at $11bn, founded his business empire on cement imports to West Africa.
Building standards and high input costs have bifurcated the organization of the construction
industry. While elite homes are constructed by foreign construction companies, ordinary urban
housing is largely self-built to ad hoc personal designs. This sacrifices the potential for
economies of scale and specialization, and rules out the key designs for density such as
townhouses and multi-storey flats.
Legal Rights
Legal rights affect the housing market in three respects: the ownership, security and
marketability of land rights; the extent to which housing can function as collateral; and the rights
of tenants relative to landlords.
African urban land rights are confused and contested. Claims to legal title jostle in corrupt courts
and compete with informal de facto possession. The same piece of land may have several
claimants each supported by some sort of documentation: the number of claimants increases in
response to construction since ownership becomes more valuable. Since high residential density
requires investment in multi-storey construction, weak land rights evidently impede it. They also
delay changes in land use to higher density by impeding transactions.
Clarity in plot rights, though necessary for property to function as collateral, is not sufficient.
The function of collateral depends upon the ability of a creditor to foreclose on the property in
15
defined circumstances of arrears. This in turn depends upon the law, and the reliability and speed
with which courts implement it. The common experience has been for delays in court
proceedings and judicial corruption to make foreclosure unreliable. However, reform is feasible.
Ethiopia has recently introduced draconian legislation that is being enforced in its courts
whereby creditors can foreclose after only a few months accumulation of mortgage arrears.
Tenancy will be the affordable option for most urban households. In much of urban Africa, while
there is a well-functioning formal rental market for expatriates, that for ordinary households has
largely informalized in response to generous tenant protection. For example, in Nairobi tenants
with rent of less than $60 per month have enhanced rights and landlords cannot raise rents.
In summary, the confused nature of urban land rights in Africa reflects the recent nature of
African urbanization and the very slow and confused evolution of rural land rights. In societies
with few other assets and a long and recent attachment to the soil, land rights are inevitably
politically sensitive; governments have lacked sufficient legitimate authority to resolve them.
This contributes to the lack of investment in housing, leaving ordinary households in single-
storey dwellings, crowded but not dense.
Financial Innovation
In 19th century Britain urbanization triggered innovation in the mortgage market through
building societies. They were able to out-compete banks because they had lower administrative
costs and lower risks and so could work on narrower spreads. The setup costs of a loan could be
spread over many years and default was limited by good collateral. Not only were spreads low,
but in 19th century Britain inflation was very low, so that nominal interest rates could be low.
Building societies were also able to build a large deposit base from ordinary savers.
Although some African cities have building societies, they cater to either high-end housing or to
civil servants. Except in the Franc Zone inflation is periodically fairly high, so that on
conventional interest rate practices the principle is at times rapidly eroded. Typical terms on
African ‘affordable’ mortgages are an interest rate of 22 percent and a term of only ten years.
Unsurprisingly, defaults are concentrated in the first two years of the loan when in real terms
repayments are at a maximum. The upshot is that mortgages only cater to a tiny elite: around
three per cent of households. Hence, in Africa the normal financial engine of investment in
residential structures is not able to function.
A common policy response has been to place ceilings on interest rates, or to offer subsidized
public mortgages. For example, the Nigerian government has been providing mortgages at 6
percent at a time when the market interest rate is 18 percent. Evidently, this is not fiscally viable
at any scale. A more viable policy might be to introduce indexation of mortgages, enabling
16
repayments to be stretched over a much longer period. There may also be scope for building
societies to mobilise untapped savings through the new techniques of e-banking, as has been
pioneered in Kenya. By matching the indexation of their mortgage assets with the indexation of
their deposit liabilities building societies could have a safer business model. It is important for
housing finance to attract domestic savings because, not being an export sector, it would expose
foreign finance to an exchange rate risk that would require a corresponding level of interest rates.
For housing to function as low-risk collateral, building societies need the conditions discussed
above. Legal title would have to be clear, and court processes reliable. Formal housing would
need to be affordable, of standard design, and built to enforced standards, so that it could readily
be valued.
4.3 Governance for urban infrastructure
Around the world, many cities provide the connectivity that enables high productivity along with
the social infrastructure for liveability. But most cities in poor countries provide neither. This
dramatic and persistent manifestation of multiple equilibria demands explanation.
To some extent, the deficiencies in policy reflect deficiencies in knowledge among the
politicians and civil servants responsible for them. Pertinent research evidence is limited because
until very recently development economists have paid little attention to urbanization.
Quantitative spatial analysis is very data-demanding, and for poor countries such data have not
been available. New techniques such as the analysis of military satellite images are just opening
up the research frontier. The overwhelming emphasis of research has been either on national
policies such as industrialization and education, or on rural poverty, a topic better suited to
randomised control trials. Not only is there a deficiency in research, urban issues seldom reach
the top of government. This is partly because good urban policies require long-term thinking,
whereas the pressures of democratic politics in poor societies have favoured short horizons. But
it is also because the development agencies that strongly influence policy agendas have
prioritized social and macroeconomic issues. For example, in the World Bank, urban policies
have been just a sub-branch of one among numerous thematic Vice-Presidencies.
However, policy deficiencies predominantly reflect failures of governance. Partly this is because
the policies discussed above have been blocked by powerful special interests. For example, a key
transport policy at African levels of income is to introduce bus lanes that provide privileged road
access for mass transport. Otherwise, private vehicle use drastically reduces the connectivity
value of roads. But African urban authorities are reluctant to offend the small minority of
households rich enough to own a car. Even among car owners, the rich tend to get priority. For
example, at one stage the city authority of Lagos reduced congestion by banning cars registered
17
with odd and even number plates on alternate days, enabling the richest to evade the control by
purchasing two cars.
Special interests are also responsible for the confused state of urban land rights, which we have
suggested is hugely damaging. In most countries the ownership of urban land is politicized.
Powerful people such as politicians and senior civil servants have used their positions to
establish some claim to legal title. Corruption in the courts adds a further layer of confusion
since it invites contestation even within elites: around 80% of African court cases are about
contested land ownership. But such legal titles, often with dubious histories, are usually
insufficient to enable the eviction of those who occupy the land without title and so have de facto
possession: African elites like the courts but fear the streets. This produces a stalemate in which
low-value uses of inner city land such as low-density shack housing persist, with the owners of
legal title extracting rents well below the level implied by the valuation of the relatively few
parcels of land that have both uncontested title and vacant possession. For example, Henderson
et al (2016) estimates the cost of land underutilization in the Nairobi slum district of Kibera at
$1.8bn.
But the potential gains left unrealized are so large that vested interests are unlikely to be the
predominant explanation: why, for example, has the massive potential gain from changes of use
in Kibera not led to mutually beneficial solutions? Ultimately, such failures of governance reflect
weaknesses in the structure of authorizing environments: either nobody has the authority
necessary for action, or it is dispersed among so many actors that the coordination required is
unmanageable. This has occurred because the pace of urbanization has exceeded the capacity of
governments to redesign the local structures of political authority. Colonial cities were tiny; since
them most cities have sprawled so rapidly that they span several units of local government. The
resulting coordination problem is compounded because the delineation of authority is unclear
both between local and national government, and between numerous ministries within national
government. Practical authority is highly concentrated in Presidencies and Ministries of Finance,
but this creates a logjam of policy disputes awaiting resolution among low-ranking and disputed
issues such as urbanization.
Where presidential authority is committed to making cities efficient, vested interests can be
surmounted and the situation can rapidly change. For example, in 2011 President Museveni of
Uganda converted the governance of Kampala from the conventional structure of a local council
and a mayor, to the status of a national ministry, headed by a technocrat whose first act was to
re-staff the administration. Similarly, in Rwanda presidential authority has enabled the creation
of a definitive national register of land ownership.
In Africa authority is disproportionately concentrated in the presidency. Historically, successful
urbanization in the OECD benefited from power being decentralized to cities. In East Asia,
18
China has had a similarly decentralized approach, albeit not a democratic one, while the global
benchmarks for successful urbanization, Singapore and Hong Kong, are city-states. Given the
structure of political authority in Africa, the most credible solution is to elevate the salience of
urbanization to presidencies. As the above examples illustrate, only presidential authority can
break the impasse that has characterized policy. With its demographics delivering a bulge of
young workers heading for cities, and with commodity markets delivering a collapse in the
profitability of resource extraction, harnessing the productivity potential of urbanization is no
longer one issue among many. It has become the decisive strategy of the coming decade.
Building a strong evidential basis from research may become critical both in shifting the agenda
of the development agencies, and in convincing presidents that a fundamental change of
approach is imperative.
4.4 Infrastructure for national connectivity: economies of scope in resource extraction
Africa is a vast continent with very poor national connectivity. Post-Independence, the provision
and maintenance of national transport infrastructure proved to be prohibitively expensive for
governments with weak tax systems and high demands for other spending. Domestically, the
resulting wide wedge between on-farm food prices and urban prices contributed to the secular
trend whereby cities are often fed predominantly from imports. Internationally, since in most
countries exports are overwhelmingly commodities produced in rural locations, it contributed to
export underperformance. The resource boom of 2004-14, which stimulated new discoveries,
both increased the need for connectivity to global markets, and provided a rare opportunity for
achieving it.
Consider a geologically virgin territory typical of a poor country where a prolonged history of
mis-governance has severely curtailed prospecting. The only known prospect, known because it
is so spectacular, is a massive deposit of a bulk mineral located in a remote area. This has never
been exploited because mis-governance ruled out the massive investment that would have been
required. Now, for the first time in the country’s history, the combination of a global commodity
boom and improved governance has transformed the investment into commercial viability. A
company negotiates with the government and acquires the right to exploit the mineral. The
question now to be negotiated is the regulatory structure for the rail-port facility that will be
required.
In this situation, the mining company is rightly wary of being subject to a hold-up problem
should control of the railway be distinct from that of the mine. It argues that the mine and the rail
are a single integrated operation and should therefore be viewed as a single commercial entity.
However, the railway has the potential to serve other users as well as the mine. It traverses the
country and so could be the backbone of a future national rail network. Building the railway so
as to be capable of meeting this potential would involve additional cost and divert the company
from its core business of mining resources and so its preference is to build the infrastructure for
19
dedicated use. Appropriate regulation has the potential to transform the railway into a valuable
national asset.
Suppose that from the overall perspective of the society the extra cost of building the facility for
multiple functions, thereby turning it into a transport corridor, would be far outweighed by the
likely future benefits. The government can require this, while indirectly shouldering the extra
costs through offering the company more generous terms of taxation. The future users cannot be
ascertained because until the rail is open to them the normal process of trial and error by which
opportunities are established cannot get underway.
Crucially, an important class of such opportunities is the extraction of other mineral deposits.
Once the rail exists, the terms on which it can be used will determine whether other prospectors
choose to invest in search. If the initial mine retains private monopoly rights over the rail it has
the power of hold-up over all such potential users of the mine. In particular, should another
company incur the sunk costs of exploration and discover a highly valuable deposit, the owner of
the railway can set terms of usage that extract not only the entire rents on the discovery, but even
the value of the sunk costs. Evidently, since a potential prospector is aware of this power before
investing, the negotiation as to the terms of rail usage will occur prior any investment in search,
but even at this stage the rail owner is in a position to extract the entire expected rents from
exploration. This places the rail owner in direct competition with the government. Normally, the
rents from exploration would accrue to government, for example through a sequential process of
auctioning prospecting rights as the territory is gradually opened up to commercial mining
activity. The rail owner can entirely pre-empt these rents through a prior negotiation process with
potential bidders. No company can know how much it is worth bidding for prospecting rights
until it has reached a deal with the rail company on the costs of usage. Equivalently stated, the
only credible bidder for these subsequent prospecting rights is the company that owns the
railway, and knowing itself to be the sole bidder it has no incentive to pay other than token
amounts for these explicit rights. It already owns the implicit rights.
Hence, in the absence of regulation, the natural monopoly dictated by the network economies of
a major railway imply that the owner of the railway acquires the expected value of all future
mineral discoveries covered by the rail network. The potential scale of the rail network cannot be
ascertained until the discovery process has played out, so the potential value of the rents is a
classic instance of uncertainty as distinct to risk: no meaningful number can be placed on it. As
such, it is better to leave this uncertain value with the society that to allow it to be sold to the
company that purchases the original mining concession as a potentially large part of the implicit
value of its explicit mining rights. Otherwise, the company is acquiring both the explicit rights to
exploit the known deposit and the implicit right to the entire undiscovered resource endowment
covered by the potential future rail network. This second component of its acquisition is of such
uncertain value that it is unlikely significantly to bid up the price that the company is willing to
pay for its explicit mining rights: there is insufficient information to provide the basis for a
commercial valuation that could meet the requirements of an audit.
20
In effect, unless the government insists that the railway should have clearly specified open access
terms, this initial sale of rights hands over a great swathe of future mining rights to the company.
Because an inherent transport monopoly is interdependent with a prospecting process that is
intrinsically sequential, regulation to enforce open access is essential. The public interest is
overwhelmingly in favour of the preservation of competition for prospecting rights: only
competition can ensure that it is the government rather than the monopolist that acquires the
rents from natural resource exploitation. In poor countries, since the mining companies are
foreign, the social capture of rents is the key means by which the society can benefit from
extraction. The situation described above, in which the construction of rail or port infrastructure
for a particular deposit precedes systematic search over the territory that is potentially served by
the infrastructure, is typical of an entire class of country and so appropriate rules of governance
for that infrastructure are an important matter.12 Africa’s largest mining project, the Simandou
iron ore mine in Guinea which is currently underway, is an example of a negotiation in which
this issue has been central.
Similar issues arise with other infrastructure with the potential for shared use, such as national
networks for mobile phones, where a substantial part of the investment cost is the provision of
towers. As with rail, this provides the potential for private monopoly. With good regulation, the
business of operating the network of towers can be split off from that of mobile phones, owned
by an independent tower operator. The operator sells shared use to the phone companies on equal
terms.
While the case for regulation to require open access to private rail networks is analytically clear,
it has seldom been made operative in Africa. More typically, companies have negotiated deals
that provide some quick finance, but finesse operating complexities.
5. Conclusion
In poor countries, radical improvements in connectivity, both urban and national, are critical for
the higher productivity that is the essence of development. The investment costs of providing this
enhanced connectivity far exceed the potential for aid finance. International private finance is
unlikely beyond that needed for resource extraction. With the end of the commodity boom and
the flight of international capital to safe assets, the scope for sovereign borrowing which briefly
opened in 2010, is again severely limited. Hence, it is important that connectivity be improved
by alternative ways of raising revenue, and means that minimize the cost of infrastructure. We
have suggested three complementary approaches.
12 For a fuller treatment see Collier and Ireland (2016).
21
First, urban public finance needs to be put on a sound footing by the introduction of land and
property taxation. This is equitable, efficient and administratively feasible. But as with all tax
raising measures, it takes political authority to introduce and implement.
A second approach is to raise density, since density has the potential to radically reduce per
capita infrastructure costs. We have discussed two sets of policies that could raise density. By
prioritizing transport infrastructure for urban connectivity, population-weighted national density
could be dramatically increased. It could also be increased through raising residential density
within cities by a series of measures to improve the operation of housing and urban land markets.
The other is to piggyback national infrastructure onto the private investments in resource
extraction that have been triggered across Africa by commodity boom. Although that boom is
over, the horizon for investment in mineral extraction is typically several decades, and so less
sensitive than sovereign lending to current prices.
None of these policies are currently common in poor countries, and certainly not in Africa.
Governments have been fearful and neglectful of urbanization. Urban transport infrastructure has
been underprovided, and investment in residential density has been negligible. In consequence,
Africa’s cities have very poor connectivity and so have not attracted internationally traded
economic activities. Similarly, to date, investment in rail and ports for resource extraction has
almost invariably been for dedicated use by individual companies.
In the heady days of the commodity booms and the slogans about ‘Africa Rising’, governments
may have been lulled into a sense of confidence that infrastructure needs would be met
externally. It is now time for infrastructure to become a serious priority of domestic policy,
through solutions that are smart and parsimonious.



Abstract Transportation specialists, urban planners, and public health officials have been steadfast in encouraging active modes of transportation over the past decades. Conventional thinking, however, suggests that providing infrastructure for cycling and walking in the form of off-street trails is critically important. An outstanding question in the literature is how one’s travel is affected by the use of such facilities and specifically, the role of distance to the trail in using such facilities. This research describes a highly detailed analysis of use along an off-street facility in Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. The core questions addressed in this investigation aim to understand relationships between: (1) the propensity of using the trail based on distance from the trip origin and destination, and (2) how far out of their way trail users travel for the benefit of using the trail and explanatory factors for doing so. The data used in the analysis for this research was collected as a human intercept survey along a section of an off-street facility. The analysis demonstrates that a cogent distance decay pattern exists and that the decay function varies by trip purpose. Furthermore, we find that bicyclists travel, on average, 67% longer in order to include the trail facility on their route. The paper concludes by explaining how the distance decay and shortest path versus taken path analysis can aid in the planning and analysis of new trail systems.
Keywords Non-motorized transportation  Cycling  Infrastructure  Distance decay  Route choice  Sustainability
K. J. Krizek (&)
Active Communities/Transportation (ACT) Research Group, University of Colorado, Environmental Design Building, Campus Box 314, Boulder, CO 80309-0314, USA
e-mail: kjkrizek@gmail.com
K. J. Krizek
Planning and Design, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA
A. El-Geneidy  K. Thompson
Active Communities/Transportation (ACT) Research Group, Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs, University of Minnesota, 301 19th Ave S., Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
e-mail: geneidy@umn.edu
  123
612 Transportation (2007) 34:611–624
 Introduction
Transportation specialists, urban planners, and public health officials have been steadfast in encouraging active modes of transportation over the past decades. While the motives for doing so may differ somewhat between professions—urban planners to enhance quality of life, transportation specialists to mitigate congestion, public health to increase physical activity—each ardently aim to increase levels of walking and cycling. Decisions to walk or bicycle are the outcome of myriad factors. Conventional thinking, however, suggests that providing infrastructure for cycling and walking in the form of off-street trails is critically important. An outstanding question in the literature is how one’s travel is affected by the use of such facilities.
This research describes a highly detailed analysis of use along an off-street facility in Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA. In contrast to other studies which tend to be restricted to examining type, time, and intensity of use of non-motorized facilities, our investigation complements such data with overall travel activity, origin and destination locations, and select route choice data to better position this emerging body of literature against the larger picture of one’s travel patterns. The core questions addressed in this investigation aim to understand relationships between: (1) the propensity of using the trail based on distance from the trip origin and destination, and (2) how far out of their way trail users travel for the benefit of using the trail and some explanatory factors for doing so.
The analysis portion of the paper is divided along the lines of each of the questions previously mentioned. We first review available literature on these issues. The data source used in the analysis for this research was collected as a human intercept survey along a part of an off-street facility. The central focus of this investigation turns to describing a variety of distance-decay functions and analysis to determine additional distance traveled by cyclists when using trails and the factors leading to such additional distance.
Relevant literature
Literature examining relationships between the built environment and non-motorized travel, particularly cycling, is burgeoning. Past theoretical work offers conceptual frame- works to understand specific relationships between specialized facilities and cycling (Pikora et al. 2003). Subsequently, empirical research has sought to shed light on relatively general claims suggesting that facilities help induce use—a claim that has been analyzed at various levels of geography. For example, using seven case studies of North American cities, researchers have examined several different factors affecting levels of cycling (Pucher et al. 1999), concluding that infrastructure is one of several factors affecting cycling. Other city-wide comparisons also suggest the strong role of culture (Rietveld and Daniel 2004). Focusing on 35 cities across the U.S., other work examined correlations between facilities and levels of bicycle commuting (Nelson and Allen 1997; Dill and Carr 2003). The more recent and updated version of this analysis found the strongest correlation to be between bicycle commute mode share and the number of off-street bike lanes per square mile.
Studies that employ relatively large units of analysis (e.g., an entire community or even census tracts), however, are considerably limited in their ability to address relationships
123

Transportation (2007) 34:611–624 613
 between specific facilities and patterns of use. Therefore, other research focuses on more specific units of analysis (e.g., specific trails). For example, some studies examine patterns of use along specific trails noting counts (Hunter and Huang 1995), times of use (Lindsey et al. 2004), purpose of travel (Merom et al. 2003) or relationship to levels of physical activity (Troped et al., 2001). Still, studies of this variety fail to fully capture the dimension of who is using the facility and their geographical distribution, most notably where they traveled from. Such information is helpful because the distance traveled to use a bicycle facility could be used as a measure of the desire to use—or in economists’ terms, a willingness to pay—for cycling infrastructure investments.
Some available research hones in on elements of this question looking at the additional distance users are willing to travel for facilities. For example, Shafizadeh and Niemeier (1997) used intercept surveys along a well-known bicycle trail in Seattle to investigate the role of proximity to an off-road bicycle trail in affecting route choice decisions. They found that as the distance between the trip origin and the off-road trail increases, travel time increases to a point and then decreases. This led them to con- clude that a 0.5 to 0.75 mile ‘‘bike shed’’ could exist around an off-road bike path, within which individuals will be willing to increase their travel time to access that facility and outside of which individuals preferred a more direct route. In a different revealed preference investigation, Aultmann-Hall et al. (1997) used GIS to investigate bicycle commuter routes in Guelph, Canada. They compared participants’ shortest paths to their actual paths, learning that people diverge little from the shortest path, and that most bicycle commuters use major road routes. Stinson and Bhat (2003) administered an Internet-based stated preference survey and used the data to estimate a logit model of how facility attributes affected commuter route choice. While their model showed that the most important variable affecting route preference was travel time, the facility type had a statistically significant effect on route choice. In particular, they found that cyclists are willing to tolerate about 10% longer travel times in order to use routes on residential streets and routes with a bicycle facility at bridge locations rather than routes on minor and major arterials with no bicycle facility at bridge locations. Finally, using a computer-based adaptive stated preference survey, Tilahun et al. (2005) sur- veyed 167 people to learn that cyclists are willing to travel up to 20 min more (assuming a baseline 20 min commute) to switch from an unmarked on-road facility with side parking to an off-road bicycle trail, with smaller changes associated with less dramatic improvements.
Even considering the above findings, two different phenomena remain outstanding. The first relates to the distance users are willing to travel to use a trail or a facility. For example, the pedestrian literature widely cites that people are willing to walk a quarter mile or so—a finding most reliably traced back to writings offered in the early 1980’s (Untermann 1984). The cycling literature is absent of such a threshold (based on either empirics or assertions), probably because such a threshold would inevitably depend on the characteristics and overall quality of the facility. The second has to do with understanding the myriad factors associated with the route or trip purpose (e.g., inter- sections) involved in traveling a further distance, especially for a highly desirable trail facility.
Furthermore, existing studies have limited applicability because the research may be based on: hypothetical scenarios (e.g., stated preference); a lack of a consistent type of facilities connecting common origins and destinations; an inability to provide realistic scenarios for comparison; and/or potentially biased samples of respondents (e.g., the sampled bicyclists were tolerant of environments too risky to be acceptable to the larger
123

614 Transportation (2007) 34:611–624
 population). This paper tackles such shortcomings in the available research by examining the travel behavior of cyclists along a highly desirable urban trail. We respond to two separate but related questions: (a) addressing distance-decay curves, showing how far users traveled to use the facility, and (b) explaining how far out of their way cyclists are willing to travel to use the facility.
Description of survey and data
The analysis employs data collected from users of an urban trail system that spans southern Minneapolis, Minnesota, and an adjoining suburb to the west (St. Louis Park). The Twin Cities metropolitan region boasts a trail system unparalleled among major metropolitan areas in the U.S., totaling over 2,722 kilometers (1,692 miles). While not nearly as extensive, striped on-street bike lanes are common as well. The network of on- and off- street trails is accessible to most residents, with 90% of homes within 1,600 m (one mile) of an off-street trail. Furthermore, Twin Cities residents cherish their bicycle trails, especially in the summer months. Ten percent of Minnesota adults bike to work or school at least once a year (Pucher and Renne 2003). In 2000, Minneapolis was the number three bike commuting city nationwide (after Tucson and San Francisco, but ahead of more popular bicycling oriented cities such as Seattle, WA and Portland, OR), with 1.9–2.6% of commuters biking to work (Dill and Carr 2003).
The specific data used in this analysis was collected in the summer of 2005 as an intercept survey at 13 locations along part of a well-established and highly desirable urban trail system (for photographs of the trail, see Fig. 1a, b). The 13 data collection sites were distributed over three parts of the trail: the Kenilworth section (the north spur), the Mid- town Greenway (the east spur), and the Southwest trail (the southwest spur) (see Fig. 2).
Hennepin County administered the survey and collected data in 5-h shifts at varying times of day and days of the week. In most cases, the same location was surveyed twice. All trail users were prompted to fill out a four-page survey which was completed by an estimated one-half of all users. The survey included questions about respondents’ activities on the trail, frequency of trail use, residential location, general activity level, and satis- faction with the trail system. Also included were an half dozen questions focusing on their current trip (hereafter referred to as the reference trip), specifying information about their trip origin, destination, purpose, etc. Responses from the reference trip are used as the basis for this analysis.
 Fig. 1 Photographs of trail sections (source: Kevin J. Krizek)
123

Transportation (2007) 34:611–624 615
  Fig. 2 Locations where survey was administered
Distance-decay function
Distance-decay functions are a relatively straightforward, yet robust, way to understand the spatial behavior of travelers and can be used for any mode of transportation planning. Decay functions specify the distribution of trip lengths as a function of a measure of impedance to travel (typically measured in the form of time or distance) (Taylor 1975; Luoma et al. 1993). Specifically, decay functions are estimated in one of two ways. The first requires a general survey of the population and would measure the percentage of neighborhood residents (e.g., by census tract/block group) that use the trail and determine how the percentage varies with distance from the access points. This approach would survey both users and non-users of the activity, in this case use of trail. The second approach, and the strategy used herein, focuses on users of the activity to learn how far they are willing to travel, a concept often applied to transit (Zhao et al. 2003).
As the name implies, distance has a decaying effect on the likelihood of travel between two locations. The function is a general measure, incorporating vast amounts of infor- mation about the structure of transportation networks, as well as surrounding land uses and urban form. One might expect the shape of the function to vary by the purpose of the trips. For example, shopping trips via bicycle would have more residents cycling shorter dis- tances for a trail (assuming users are burdened with the need to carry purchases); recre- ational trips might exhibit a flatter curve, as one is free of the need to carry goods free of time constraints. Either way, intuition suggests that trail users are more likely to have trip origins closer to the trail than further away.
We mapped the home location of each respondent and noted the trail entrance and exit location as well as the self-reported purpose of the reference trip.1,2 Of the total 3,121
1 The survey allowed eight reasons for using the trail. In the interest of parsimony, we aggregated the responses into three categories: work/school (commute to work; go to or from school/university), shopping (go shopping/run errands), recreation (get exercise, walk pet, enjoy scenery, socialize, go to meet family/ friends).
2 In a perfect world, we would also be able to use their described origin and destination location. For reasons described in a later footnote, this field was not well populated with usable information. In order to maximize the number of respondents used to estimate the distance-decay curves, we assumed respondents were traveling to or from their home and calculated the network distance from their home location to the nearest trail access point (entrance or exit)—an assumption we feel preserves the integrity of the data.
 123

616 Transportation (2007) 34:611–624
  Fig. 3 Distance decay for trail users (for cyclists)
respondents with usable responses for the above questions, 75% of them reported cycling to the trail, 12% used auto, and 8.5% walked.3 The overwhelming majority of respondents cycled to the trail and along the trail; we therefore estimate distance-decay curves for these users.
The manner in which distance to the trail (the x-axis) is measured is also an important matter in this exercise, especially considering shorter travel distances of cycling. Two predominant strategies are Euclidian and network; the former measures the simple straight line distance between two points (a.k.a. the distance as the crow flies). The latter measures the distance required to travel on a network (typically road) between two points. An added consideration in this research is the fact that the trail has limited access points.4
Figure 3 depicts the distance-decay curve for all respondents, showing the percentage of users cycling from various distances away from the trail. Over one-half of the users cycle less than 2,500 m to use the trail and more than three-quarters of the users cycle less than 5,000 m; the curve quickly flattens out after this distance as the remaining one-quarter of the users travel distances ranging from 5,000 to 25,000 m from the nearest access point. The fitted exponential curve has an R2 of 0.938, and a functional form of 29.29*exp (00.001x), where x is the network distance from origin or destination to the point of entrance or exit of the trail respectively.
Figure 4 displays distance-decay curves by three different purposes of the reference trip. The difference in the distance effects among the three trip purposes is confirmed by visually inspecting the different distance-decay curves; also, note differences in associated parameters presented in Table 1. Respondents using the trail for shopping and work display the steepest decay curve (respondents are less willing to use the facility for this type of trip), with shopping having a slight steeper form. As expected, those using the trail for recreational purpose display the flattest curve that also extends for longer distances.
3 While the trail system is very attractive, Fig. 2 shows over half of the survey locations are within 10 or so blocks of the ‘‘Chain of Lakes’’ in Minneapolis. This area is highly cherished among walkers due to its recreational and scenic amenities, which helps explain the relatively low levels of walking along the nearby trail being analyzed.
4 The trail was not accessible at every street intersection because of grade separation. This analysis only measures network distances to each access point in the trail.
 123

Transportation (2007) 34:611–624
617
  Fig. 4 Distance decay by trip purpose (for cyclists)
 Table 1 Distance decay functions
Trip purpose
Recreation Work/school Shopping/errands Total sample
N Coefficient 1,172 38.55
201 33.28
112 47.64 1,486 29.29
Exp R2 0.001x 0.94
0.001x 0.898 0.0001x 0.957 0.001x 0.938
  Shortest distance versus distance traveled
Given the limited data requirements, the distance-decay functions provide robust measures of how far cyclists are willing to travel to use a trail. An alternative method to understand the so-called ‘‘value’’ of the trail to users is to learn how far out of their way they are willing to travel to use the facility. We now turn to examining route choice decisions by comparing a cyclist’s chosen path using the trail relative to the shortest distance between their stated origin and destination (see Fig. 5, for example).
Key data for this exercise included characteristics of the reference trip presented above (access location, purpose, and mode); however, mapping route information also requires data about the specific origin of the trip,5 the exit location, and final destination.6 To determine the distance of the path taken by respondents, we calculated three distance segments: (1) the shortest path distance from origin to trail access point, (2) the distance
5 For this latter analysis, we used responses from the specific origin, rather than their home location. The poor reporting of the data, however, considerably lowered the number of usable responses (described further below).
6 Satisfying all of these requirements considerably lowered the number of usable responses. For example, a total of 595 respondents answered each of these questions. Another 420 respondents were eliminated for providing unidentifiable locations (i.e., ‘‘drugstore’’) or for listing the same access and egress point (e.g., a recreational ‘‘loop’’ trip). Finally, non-cyclists and respondents that did not specify a trip purpose or had a missing value in any field were excluded. The remaining 142 records were included in the statistical analysis.
 123

618 Transportation (2007) 34:611–624
  Fig. 5 Visual depiction of shortest distance versus distance traveled
traveled on the trail from access to egress point, and (3) the shortest path distance from the egress point to the destination. The shortest path distance was skimmed using the same network file consisting of roads and trails available to bicyclists; the route may or may not have included bicycle specific facilities.
Analysis
A difference variable was calculated by subtracting the distance of the calculated shortest route from the distance of the route taken. The median of these differences is 1,082 m (0.67 miles) and the mean is 2,761 m (1.715 miles), with a standard deviation of 4,050. Figure 6 displays the large right tail of the distribution; the difference for over half of the respondents was between 0 and 1,200 m (0 and 0.74 miles).
123

Transportation (2007) 34:611–624 619
  Fig. 6 Frequency distribution: distance traveled minus shortest distance
We first used a paired samples T-test to compare the difference in the means of the shortest route distance with the mean taken route distance, a result that was statistically significant at the 99% level of confidence (t = 8.09). Given that the routes selected by trail users were longer than shortest path distances, our next aim was to employ two ordinary least squares (OLS) regression models to more robustly explain this finding. The first model estimates, in a multivariate context, the additional distance residents are willing to travel than the shortest distance. The second model aims to explain factors leading to differences between the chosen and the shortest route.
The independent variables used in each model have been gleaned from, or relate to, characteristics other studies have found to be important when focusing on cyclist travel behavior; the variables can be grouped roughly into two categories: characteristics of the respondent and characteristics of the trip. Characteristics of the respondent include demographic variables such as age, race, and gender, and the person’s activity level and city of residence. Characteristics of the trip include trip purpose, trip mode, time of day, and the distance traveled on the trail between access and egress points (descriptive statistics shown in Table 2). Two variables were added to account for differences in the safety and relative attractiveness of the two routes: (1) the number of intersections along both the taken route, and the shortest routes, and (2) the number of bicycle crashes reported between 1999 and 2002 on both routes during the same time period.
The first model represents each respondent with two cases: one for the calculated shortest path route and another for the chosen route. The dependent variable in this regression is the distance of the route traveled (ln). Keeping all other variables constant, the statistically significant coefficient from the dummy variable for the route suggests that the chosen path was longer than the shortest-distance path by 67% (e0.515). Another factor positively associated with trip distance is the number of intersections. Relative to the Greenway (the omitted category), those surveyed on the Southwest trail had a longer trip distance. Conversely, variables negatively associated with trip distance include age of the respondent and trips where respondents were surveyed on the Kenilworth trail. The number of intersections is highly associated with the trip distance and is expected; the two are in the same geographic vicinity and longer trips typically have more intersections.
123

620 Transportation (2007) 34:611–624 Table 2 Descriptive statistics for variables introduced in the regression analysis
  Variables
Respondent characteristics
Yearly instances of trail use Respondent age
Respondent is female
Respondent is white
Residence outside Minneapolis Surveyed on Kenilworth Trail Surveyed on Southwest LRT trail Surveyed in the afternoon/evening Surveyed on weekend
Trip characteristics
Trip purpose is work/school
Trip purpose is shopping
Difference in number of crashes between routes
Difference in number of intersections between routes
Length of trip traveled along a trail Is the trip taken or shortest
Number of crashes along route Number of intersections along route
Mean Std. dev.
147.98 141.31 40.09 13.99 0.43 0.50 0.97 0.17 0.18 0.38 0.09 0.29 0.10 0.30 0.77 0.42 0.33 0.47
0.55 0.50 0.18 0.39 19.60 46.25 30.89 76.41
3973.70 2344.40 na na 56.29 40.93 132.65 87.42
Min Max
1.00 720.00 14.00 79.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00
0.00 1.00
0.00 1.00 109.00 141.00 2 256.00 264.00 2
233.71 12063.00 2 na na na 1.00 217.00 1 14.00 558.00 1
Used in model
1 &2 1 &2 1 &2 1 &2 1 &2 1 &2 1 &2 1 &2 1 &2
 1 &2 1 &2
 The dependent variable in Model 2 is the difference between the chosen route and the shortest distance route (ln(chosen  shortest)). In this model and as shown in Table 3, any statistically significant differences are most reliably traced back to measures used to ac- count for differences in the relative attractiveness and safety of the two routes: the number of intersections on the taken route minus the number of intersections on the shortest route. In addition, a distance variable is introduced to account for the length of the trip being traveled along a trail.
Observing the statistically significant variables, the distance traveled along the trail has a positive effect on the difference between the chosen route and the shortest-distance route. Respondents who travel longer distances on the trail itself, all else being held constant, were more likely to travel greater distances in order to take a route that incorporates a trail. If users know they will be traveling a long distance on the trail itself, they may be more willing to travel out of their way to get there. For one additional meter traveled along the trail, the difference between chosen and taken route is expected to increase by 0.03%. Assuming that the average distance traveled along a trail is approximately 4,000 m, these results suggest that the average taken trip will be longer than the shortest by approximately 120%. Meanwhile, the difference in the number of intersections between the two routes has a positive effect on the difference in the route length. One additional intersection leads to a 0.8% increase in the difference in route length. Consequently, this model suggests that bicyclists are willing to endure a route with more intersections that also incorporates a trail segment.
123

Transportation (2007) 34:611–624
621
 Table 3 OLS regression models Variables
Constant
Yearly instances of trail use
Respondent age
Respondent is female
Respondent is white
Residence outside Minneapolis
Surveyed on Kenilworth trail
Surveyed on Southwest trail
Surveyed in the afternoon/evening
Surveyed on weekend
Trip purpose is work/school
Trip purpose is shopping
Number of crashes along route
Number of intersections along route
Difference in number of crashes (chosen-shortest) Difference in number of intersections
Route traveled (=1), shortest distance (=0) Length of trip traveled along a trail
Adjusted R2
N
Dependent variable
Model 1 Coefficient
7.99*** 0.000 0.003** 0.020 0.078 0.033 0.192*** 0.191*** 0.072 0.049 0.031 0.013 0.001 0.006***
0.515***
0.7756
282
Distance of route traveled (ln)
 Model 2 t-Stat. Coefficient
57.93 5.969*** 0.826 0.001 2.441 0.002 0.505 0.145 0.687 0.408 -0.629 0.285 2.978 0.349 2.787 0.530 1.554 0.279 0.994 0.339 0.534 0.242 0.234 0.046 0.993
t-Stat. 10.09
0.3662 0.4154 0.8611 0.8352 1.248 1.279 1.648 1.413 1.573 0.9738 0.1879
   19.140
14.190
0.001 0.3609 0.008*** 4.278
0.0003*** 8.71
0.5064
141
Difference in route distance (chosen  shortest) (ln)
 *Significant at the 90% level, **significant at the 95% level, ***significant at the 99% level
Several other variables, while failing to reach levels of statistical significance, reliably had a strong effect on the difference in the length between the shortest and the taken routes. We expected these variables to have a stronger affect because they have, in some manner, been shown to theoretically affect cyclist behavior in other studies. Some of the independent variables capture the time the respondent filled out the survey. The differ- ence in distances is expected to increase by 32% if the survey was conducted in the afternoon, while keeping all other variables constant. Similarly if the respondent was surveyed during a weekend day, the difference increased by 40%. Accordingly this can be mainly related to the fact that afternoon and weekend trail users typically have fewer constraints on their time and therefore more willing to travel further in order to use a trail. Many of the reported destinations were recreational events like art fairs; using the trail to get to such an event may be part of the attraction, making the trail a de facto destination. Users residing outside the City of Minneapolis are more likely to divert from the shortest route. Residing outside the City of Minneapolis leads to an increase in the difference between the chosen and shortest routes by 32%. In addition, people using the Greenway experienced an increase in the difference between their actual and shortest trip by 40% relative to users of the Kenilworth Trail and 70% more than the Southwest trail
123

622 Transportation (2007) 34:611–624
 users. Surprisingly, the difference in the number of crashes played a negligible role in affecting travel distance.7
Discussion and conclusions
The results from this detailed analysis represent a notable effort to understand the travel behavior of cyclists associated with an urban trail system. At the outset, two questions were posed: (1) how far are users willing to travel to use the trail system, and (2) what are the factors that prompt a cyclist to go out of their way to use the trail and how far is this distance?
The above analysis empirically demonstrates that a cogent decay pattern exists; more than half of the users cycled less than 2,500 m to reach the trail and there was a sharp decline thereafter. Furthermore, the purpose of the trips notably affected the shape of decay curves. The second part of the analysis describes how many bicyclists are in fact willing to travel substantially out of their way in order to use a high-quality off-street bicycle facility, on average a distance of about 4.21 km (2.6 miles), which represents a 67% increase over the shortest distance. The effect is heightened on weekends and on longer trips. Users do not seem to be deterred by intersections.
The results have several implications for planning and policy. The distance-decay functions represent integral elements of the impedance function typically used in measures of accessibility for land use-transportation modeling. Such a function is almost always theoretically derived and the same function is applied to myriad destinations and trip purposes. This application has uncovered reliable functions that could be used for detailed modeling purposes.
Second, this information can be used to guide the spacing of new trails to maximize levels of use. For planning purposes, one might assume that the additional distance traveled is divided approximately equally between the distance from origin to trail access and from trail egress to destination, about 2.1 km (1.3 mile) for each segment. This suggests that off- road bicycle facilities would ideally be located 3.15–4.21 km (1.5–2.6 miles) from one another. Focusing on the drawing power of this facility alone, the results suggest this facility is so desirable that cyclists are not only willing to travel additional distance to reach them, but will also tolerate accessing them via routes with high numbers of intersections. The appeal of bicycle facilities, as measured by the distance bicyclists are willing to travel to use them, seems to be stronger for bicyclists who will be traveling a long distance on the trail and for those making trips in the afternoons and on weekends.
Several opportunities exist to build on this analysis in future research. For example, this research examined data of people cycling to and along a highly attractive trail. Depending on the nature of other trails, or even other segments of the trail that was studied, the reader would need to consider such characteristics accordingly. More importantly, the sample of users does not allow us to infer behavior about those who do not cycle or prefer to use on-street bicycle facilities. A larger-scale, geographically based sampling frame would ideally capture these preferences. With additional sources of data, the analyst could include other pertinent explanatory variables such as the number of signalized intersections or average quality of pavement. Finally, as with every self-report survey, there are inevitable
7 We tallied the number of crashes and intersections within a 200 m buffer of both the shortest and chosen routes. For the route chosen, the trail segment itself was not buffered and no crashes or intersections were counted along the trail segment.
 123

Transportation (2007) 34:611–624 623
 reporting errors, such as assuming the user accurately reported their points of origin and destination in a manner that provides usable data. Because we were limited to the survey data gathered, it was necessary to assume that respondents used the shortest path route to get from their origin to the trail access point and from the trail egress point to the desti- nation. It would be advantageous to employ GPS units to provide more reliable data on such behavior and for some of the questions.
Overall, this work raises a number of important data, measurement, and methodological issues for future researchers and planners looking to understand how a trail system affects the travel behavior of cyclists. Alternative sampling as well as qualitative analysis would complement this research by shedding light on some of the factors, attitudes or methods we were unable to employ in this exercise. Continued research will allow planners to more accurately predict the placement and characteristics of future facilities. We look forward to others refining and adding to these methods, which should lead to sharper research results as well as better policy decisions on bicycle facility investment.



